# ISO/IEC 15944-4:2015(E)

**Information technology -- Business Operational View --**
**Part 4: Business transaction scenarios -- Accounting and economic ontology**

*Second edition, 2015-04-01*

---

## Foreword

ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electrotechnical
Commission) form the specialized system for worldwide standardization. National bodies that are
members of ISO or IEC participate in the development of International Standards through technical
committees established by the respective organization to deal with particular fields of technical
activity. ISO and IEC technical committees collaborate in fields of mutual interest. Other international
organizations, governmental and non-governmental, in liaison with ISO and IEC, also take part in the
work. In the field of information technology, ISO and IEC have established a joint technical committee,
ISO/IEC JTC 1.
The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are
described in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1.  In particular the different approval criteria needed for
the different types of document should be noted.  This document was drafted in accordance with the
editorial rules of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 (see www.iso.org/directives).
Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject
of patent rights. ISO and IEC shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.
Details of any patent rights identified during the development of the document will be in the Introduction
and/or on the ISO list of patent declarations received (see www.iso.org/patents).
Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does not
constitute an endorsement.
For an explanation on the meaning of ISO specific terms and expressions related to conformity
assessment, as well as information about ISO’s adherence to the WTO principles in the Technical Barriers
to Trade (TBT) see the following URL:  Foreword - Supplementary information
The committee responsible for this document is ISO/IEC JTC  1, Information technology, SC  32, Data
management and interchange.
This second edition cancels and replaces the first edition (ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007), of which it constitutes
a minor revision.
ISO/IEC 15944 consists of the following parts, under the general title Information technology — Business
Operational View:
- Part 1: Operational aspects of Open-edi for implementation
- Part 2: Registration of scenarios and their components as business objects
- Part 4: Business transaction scenarios — Accounting and economic ontology
- Part 5: Identification and referencing of requirements of jurisdictional domains as sources of external
constraints
- Part 6: Technical introduction to e-Business modelling [Technical Report]
- Part 7: eBusiness vocabulary
- Part 8: Identification of privacy requirements as external constraints on business transactions
- Part 9: Business transaction traceability framework for commitment exchange
- Part 10: IT-enabled coded domains as semantic components in business transactions
- Part 20: Linking business operational view to functional service view to functional service view
The following parts are under preparation:
- Part 11: Descriptive techniques for foundational modelling in Open-edi

## Introduction

### 0.1     Purpose and overview

This work is motivated with important ideas from the ISO Open-edi specifications as represented
in ISO/IEC 15944-1. In ISO/IEC 15944-1 and in some of its earlier foundational expositions, such as
ISO/IEC 14662, there were important concepts defined and interrelated such as business transaction,
fundamental activities of a business transaction, commitment, Person, role, scenario, and others. A need
for relating all of these concepts in a formal framework for the Open-edi work is apparent.
This is a question of ontology: a formal specification of the concepts that exist in some domain of interest
and the relationships that hold them[17]. In this case, the domains of interest are those that encompass
Open‑edi activities, that is, law, economics, and accounting in an extended sense, not the internal
accounting of one particular firm, but the accountabilities of each of the participants in a market-based
business transaction.
Ontologies are generally classified as either upper-level ontologies, dealing with generalized phenomena
like time, space, and causality, or domain ontologies, dealing with phenomena in a specific field like
military operations, manufacturing, medical practice, or business. The economic and accounting
ontology being used in electronic business eXtended Markup Language (ebXML), in the UN/CEFACT
modelling methodology, and E-Commerce Integration Meta-Framework (ECIMF) work is entitled the
Resource‑Event-Agent (REA) ontology1). REA is used here as an ontological framework for specifying
the concepts and relationships involved in business transactions and scenarios in the Open-edi sense
of those terms. The resulting framework is titled the Open-edi business transaction ontology (OeBTO).
The REA ontology is actually an elementary set of concepts derived from basic definitions in accounting
and economics. These concepts are illustrated most simply with a UML class diagram. See Figure 1, which
illustrates the simple Resource-Event-Agent structure that gives REA its name. A business transaction
or exchange has two REA constellations joined together, noting that the two parties to a simple market
transfer expect to receive something of value in return when they trade. For example, a seller, who
delivers a product to a buyer, expects a requiting cash payment in return.
*[Figure 1 — Basic economic primitives of the Open-edi ontology]*
There are some specific points of synergy between the REA ontology and the ISO Open-edi specifications
as represented in ISO/IEC 15944-1.
ISO/IEC 15944-1, 3.9 defines commitment as “the making or accepting of a right, obligation, liability, or
responsibility by a Person...”. Commitment is a central concept in REA. Commitments are promises to
execute future economic events, for example, to fulfill an order by executing a delivery event.
ISO/IEC  15944-1, 6.1.3, Rule  1  states: “Business transactions require both information exchange and
commitment exchange.” REA firmly agrees with and helps give definition to this assertion. Reciprocal
commitments are exchanged in REA via economic contracts that govern exchanges, while information
Elements of the REA ontology as they are used in other standards work are explained in Annex B.

exchange is tracked via business events that govern the state transitions of business transaction entities
that represent various economic phenomena.
ISO/IEC  15944-1, 6.3.1, Rule  39  states: “Conceptually a business transaction can be considered to
be constructed from a set of fundamental activities. They are planning, identification, negotiation,
actualization, and post-actualization.” For REA, actualization is the execution of economic events that
fulfill commitments. Planning and identification involve business partners with types of economic
resources, events, and persons, while negotiation is finalized by an economic contract which is a bundle
of commitments. The UN/CEFACT Business Process Group has also defined negotiation protocols that
assist in forming commitments. The Open-edi set of activities and the REA economic concepts will
help each other tie together all the activities into a cohesive business transaction, and then unite that
transaction definition with its related information models.
Finally, with regard to the preliminary agreement between Open-edi and REA, the two major sets of ideas
that characterize the Open-edi work, the specification of business transactions and the configuration
of scenarios, correspond well at the aggregate level to what the REA ontology calls the accountability
infrastructure and the policy infrastructure. A business transaction specifies, in a descriptive sense,
actual business events of what has occurred or has been committed to. Conversely, a scenario is more
prescriptive: it configures what could be or should be. The realm of both descriptions and prescriptions
is important both to Open‑edi and REA, and they can work well in developing standards for each.

### 0.2     Definition of Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO)

According to the most widely accepted definition from Tom Gruber (1993), an ontology is a formal,
explicit specification of a shared conceptualization.2) The individual components of this meaning are
each worth examining.
- formal = machine-readable;
- explicit specification  =  concepts, properties, relations, constraints, and axioms are explicitly
defined;
- of a shared = consensus knowledge;
- conceptualization = abstract model of some phenomenon in the real world.
At present, the REA model is certainly an explicit specification of a shared conceptualization of economic
phenomena in the accounting community. A formal, machine-readable specification is not proposed in
this part of ISO/IEC 15944; however, such extensions may follow in other standards work.
This part of ISO/IEC  15944 focuses on integrating the Gruber definition of ontology with a REAbased approach. It does so from an accounting and economic ontology perspective within an Openedi Reference Model context. This is achieved through the introduction of the concept (or construct) of
“Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO)”, which is defined as follows:
formal, rule-based specification and definition of the concepts pertaining to business transactions and
scenarios and the relationships that hold among those concepts.

### 0.3     Use of the “independent” and “trading partner” perspective in the Open-edi ontology work

In normal business use, the naming perspective for the ontological primitives would be that of the
entrepreneur or of one of the two trading partners engaged in collaborative commerce. The other trading
partner would ordinarily have a mirror-image view. Thus, a sale, a cash receipt, or a resource inflow
for a particular entrepreneur would become a purchase, a cash disbursement, or a resource outflow
for a corresponding trading partner. From this perspective, business events and their accompanying
economic phenomena would be modeled twice, once in the database of each trading partner. However,
for Open-edi purposes, or for that matter for any other independent modeling of business collaborations
like the Business Requirement View BRV level of the UN/CEFACT modeling methodology, this redundancy
See also the expert contribution by Dr. Jake V. Knoppers in the JTC1/SC32/WG1 document N0220, “Draft
Definition for Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO)”, 2002-05-06.

is not acceptable because it allows the states of the two representations to become inconsistent. This
difference in naming perspective is explained below and illustrated in Figure 2.3)
*[Figure 2 — Different views of business collaboration]*
Figure 2 illustrates three independent value chains for three different enterprises. Each company has
a connected network of business processes that takes its initial input of resources (called factor inputs
for their production functions) and transforms them via cumulative flows of goods, services, rights,
and/or cash into an output for that firm’s downstream customers. For Open-edi collaboration modeling,
these internal processes are not relevant until a resource flow crosses enterprise boundaries, as is
illustrated for Enterprise #2 which accepts materials from Enterprise #1 and which delivers materials
to Enterprise #3 (most probably in both cases for cash payments in return). The two dotted lines with
double-headed arrows show these inter-enterprise events.
The independent or collaboration perspective of resource flows is anchored on the view of the eye
outside of Enterprise #2. This view sees both exchanges as conceptually similar with flows of materials
being requited by flows of funds. Such a perspective is quite different from that of the eye inside of
Enterprise #2, which sees the flow between Enterprise #1 and Enterprise #2 as a “purchase” and the
flow between Enterprise #2 and Enterprise #3 as a “sale”. Note that an eye inside of Enterprise #1 (not
shown on diagram) would have modeled the “purchase” of Enterprise #2 as a “sale” of Enterprise #1,
hence the redundancy and the inevitable inconsistency.
Business process modeling can take either of the perspectives shown by the eyes of Figure 2, but the
independent perspective is clearly the choice for Open-edi. This leads to the concept of a business
Figure 2 was contributed by the Japanese delegation to SC 32, led by Katsuhiro Morita, during the Open-edi
group meeting in Victoria in October 2001. {See further, the JTC1/SC32/WG1 document N1 N0190 “AIW159444, Information technology — Business Agreement Descriptive techniques Part 4: Open-edi Ontology”, 2001-10-22}
(Morita 2001).  Some conceptual changes and naming conventions have been added since that first contribution.

collaboration that is illustrated in Figure 34). Most generally, there is a value exchange between two
Persons, with one assuming the role of a “buyer” (has money, desires goods, services, and/or rights)
and the other assuming the role of a “seller” (has goods, services, and/or rights, desires money). It is
also possible to anchor the independent view on time, with one event being the initiating flow and the
requiting event being the responding flow. For internal database purposes of corporate accountability,
“trading partner perspective” terms are directly derivable from “independent perspective” terms.
*[Figure 3 — Concept of a business collaboration]*

### 0.4     The “Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology” (OeBTO)

“Definition of Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO)” and “Use of ‘independent’ and ‘trading
partner’ perspective in the Open-edi ontology work” have suggested
- that the components of the REA domain ontology model are sufficiently well-defined, stable, and
well-known that they can clearly serve as the basis for an ontological specification of the concepts
involved in collaborative exchanges between trading partners, and
- that the components of that model must be viewed from the outside perspective of a modeler
viewing the economic phenomena independently.
Because the primitive economic terms are being adopted here for use with the operational aspects
of Open‑edi from ISO/IEC 15944-1, the ontology to be defined will be termed the “Open-edi Business
Transaction Ontology” (OeBTO). Its definition is
formal, rule-based specification and definition of the concepts pertaining to business transactions and
scenarios and the relationships that hold among these concepts
From the definitional foundations of both ISO/IEC 15944-1 and the REA model, it follows that the OeBTO
will follow these five principles:
- as a business transaction ontology, a distinguishing characteristic of OeBTO is that in addition to
information exchange, it incorporates commitment exchange among autonomous Persons;
- an OeBTO requires the use of clear and pre-defined rules, principles, and guidelines (see
ISO/IEC 15944-1, 5.1);
- an OeBTO is neutral in terms of technology, representation, and application;
- the scope of an OeBTO covers all areas of business transactions (public/private, industry sectors,
international, regional, etc.);
- the semantics of the concepts represented in an OeBTO are explicitly specified and constrained.
Figure 3 was contributed by the Japanese delegation to SC 32, led by Katsuhiro Morita, during the Open-edi
group meeting in Seoul, in May 2002.

### 0.5     Organization and description of this part of  ISO/IEC 15944

Clause 1 and Clause 2 provide scope and normative references for OeBTO. The basic OeBTO definitions
are first enumerated in Clause 3, while Clause 4 provides a table of symbols and abbreviations. Clause 5
provides the declarative substance for this part of ISO/IEC 15944, which is a set of UML class diagrams
and conceptual explanations that circumscribe the Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology. Clause 6
explains the mechanics of a business transaction state machine, which is the procedural component of
an OeBTO, while Clause 7 explains the (internal) constraint component of OeBTO, which is its repository
for business rules.
At the end of this part of ISO/IEC 15944 are some helpful Annexes that provide elaboration on the points
raised in the main body. Normative Annex A is a consolidated list of all the terms and definitions used
in this part of ISO/IEC 15944 in both ISO English and ISO French. The other normative annex is Annex C,
which is common to ISO/IEC 15944-2, ISO/IEC 15944-4, ISO/IEC 15944-5, and ISO/IEC 15944-8. Annex B
is informative text providing more detailed background information on the REA Model. This part of
ISO/IEC 15944 concludes with a bibliography.

Information technology — Business Operational View —
Part 4:
Business transaction scenarios — Accounting and
economic ontology

## 1	 Scope

This part of ISO/IEC 15944 provides a set of UML class diagrams and conceptual explanations that
circumscribe the Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO). It explains the mechanics of a
business transaction state machine, the procedural component of an OeBTO, and the (internal) constraint
component of OeBTO, its repository for business rules.
This part of ISO/IEC 15944 addresses collaborations among independent trading partners as defined in
ISO/IEC 15944-1. This part of ISO/IEC 15944 applies to both binary collaborations (buyer and seller) and
mediated collaborations (buyer, seller, third-party). The ontological features described herein propose
standards only for the Business Operational View (BOV), that is, the business aspects of business
transactions as they are defined in ISO/IEC 15944-1.

## 2	 Normative references

The following documents, in whole or in part, are normatively referenced in this document and are
indispensable for its application. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated
references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
> **NOTE**
One or more terms and definitions of the referenced International Standards listed below are used in
Clause 3 Terms and definitions.
ISO/IEC  6523-1:1998, Information technology  — Structure for the identification of organizations and
organization parts — Part 1: Identification of organization identification schemes
ISO/IEC 11179-3:2003, Information technology — Metadata registries (MDR) — Part 3: Registry metamodel
and basic attributes
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, Information technology — Open-edi reference model
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, Information technology — Business Operational View — Part 1: Operational aspects
of Open-edi for implementation
ISO/IEC 15944-5:2008, Information technology — Business Operational View — Part 5: Identification and
referencing of requirements of jurisdictional domains as sources of external constraints

## 3 Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.

**3.1**
agent
Person (3.52) acting for another Person (3.52) in a clearly specified capacity in the context of a business
transaction (3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Excluded here are agents as “automatons” (or robots, bobots, etc.). In ISO/IEC 14662, “automatons”
are recognized and provided for but as part of the Functional Services View (FSV) where they are defined as an
“Information Processing Domain (IPD)”.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.1]*
**3.2**
attribute
characteristic of an object (3.42) or entity (3.32)
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 11179‑3:2003, 3.1.3]*
**3.3**
bilateral transaction
sub-type of a business transaction (3.8) where the Persons (3.52) include only the buyer (3.11) and the
seller (3.61), or alternatively other Persons (3.52) acting as agents (3.1) for the buyer (3.11) and/or seller
(3.61)
**3.4**
business
series of processes (3.53), each having a clearly understood purpose, involving more than one Person
(3.52), realized through the exchange of recorded information (3.56) and directed towards some mutually
agreed upon goal, extending over a period of time
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.2]*
**3.5**
business event
occurrence in time that partners (3.51) to a business transaction (3.8) wish to monitor or control
> *Note 1 to entry:* Business events are the workflow tasks that business partners need to accomplish to complete
a business transaction among themselves. As business events occur, they cause a business transaction to move
through its various phases of planning, identification, negotiation, actualization, and post-actualization.
> *Note 2 to entry:* Occurrences in time can either: (a) be internal as mutually agreed to among the parties to a
business transaction and/or (b) reference some common publicly available and recognized date/time referencing
schema (e.g. one based on using ISO 8601 and/or ISO 19135 standards).
**3.6**
business location
geographic site where an economic event (3.25) is deemed to occur with its attendant transfer of an
economic resource (3.28) from one Person (3.52) to another
**3.7**
Business Operational View
BOV
perspective of business transactions (3.8) limited to those aspects regarding the making of business
decisions and commitments (3.13) among Persons (3.52), which are needed for the description of a
business transaction (3.8)
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.3]*

**3.8**
business transaction
predefined set of activities and/or processes of Persons (3.52) which is initiated by a Person (3.52) to
accomplish an explicitly shared business goal and terminated upon recognition of one of the agreed
conclusions by all the involved Persons (3.52), although some of the recognition may be implicit
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.4]*
**3.9**
business transaction entity
computable representation of any real-world entity that participates, occurs, or is materialized during
a business transaction (3.8)
**3.10**
business transaction entity type
abstract specification of a business transaction entity (3.9), detailing its recommended characteristics,
its recommended methods, and its recommended life-cycle states
> *Note 1 to entry:* A business transaction entity type will usually specify the types of business events that cause a
business transaction entity of this type to proceed through its different states as the business transaction itself
progresses through its phases of planning, identification, negotiation, actualization and post-actualization.
**3.11**
buyer
Person (3.52) who aims to get possession of a good, service, and/or right through providing an acceptable
equivalent value, usually in terms of money, to the Person (3.52) providing such a good, service, and/or
right
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.8]*
**3.12**
collaboration space
business activity space where an economic exchange (3.27) of valued resources is viewed independently
and not from the perspective of any business partner
> *Note 1 to entry:* In collaboration space, an individual partner’s view of economic phenomena is de-emphasized.
Thus, the use of common business and accounting terms like purchase, sale, cash receipt, cash disbursement,
raw materials, and finished goods, etc. is not allowed because they view resource flows from a participant’s
perspective.
**3.13**
commitment
making or accepting of a right, obligation, liability, or responsibility by a Person (3.52) that is capable of
enforcement in the jurisdiction in which the commitment (3.13) is made
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.9]*
**3.14**
constraint
rule, explicitly stated, that prescribes, limits, governs, or specifies any aspect of a business transaction
(3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Constraints are specified as rules forming part of components of Open-edi scenarios, i.e. as
scenario attributes, roles, and/or information bundles.
> *Note 2 to entry:* For constraints to be registered for implementation in Open-edi, they must have unique and
unambiguous identifiers.
> *Note 3 to entry:* A constraint may be agreed to among parties (condition of contract) and is, therefore, considered
an “internal constraint”. Or a constraint may be imposed on parties (e.g. laws, regulations, etc.), and is, therefore,
considered an “external constraint”.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.11]*

**3.15**
custody
association between a Person (3.52) and an economic resource (3.28) where the Person (3.52) has physical
control only over the resource or controls access
> *Note 1 to entry:* Having custody of a good, service, and/or right does not imply and is differentiated from having
economic control of the same (e.g. a Person may have economic control of a good even though it is not under its
custody).
**3.16**
data (in a business transaction)
representations of recorded information (3.56) that are being prepared or have been prepared in a form
suitable for use in a computer system
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.14]*
**3.17**
defined market model
trade model where the buyer (3.11) and seller (3.61) accept the entry terms of a specified market in
advance and where that market has an accepted and recognized source for business rules and conventions
> *Note 1 to entry:* In a defined market, the phases of a business transaction, planning, identification, negotiation,
actualization, and post-actualization are governed by the rules and conventions of the particular defined market.
**3.18**
duality
association between economic events (3.25) where one is the legal or economic consideration for the
other in an exchange
> *Note 1 to entry:* Duality is the conceptual analog of double entry in traditional bookkeeping. For example, a
shipment from a partner requires a matching flow in, like a payment, to balance accounts between the parties.
**3.19**
economic agreement
arrangement of reciprocated economic commitments (3.22) between two partners (3.51) where the
abstract specification of terms of trade is incomplete and not subject to legal enforcement
**3.20**
economic bundle
association between economic commitments (3.22) and the economic contract (3.23) that bundles those
promises and binds them to the two partners (3.51) who negotiated them
**3.21**
economic claim
expectation of one Person (3.52) to receive a future inflow of economic resources (3.28) from another
Person (3.52) because of an economic exchange (3.27) which is currently incomplete
**3.22**
economic commitment
type of commitment (3.13) by one Person (3.52) to transfer economic resources (3.28) to another Person
(3.52) at some specified point in the future
**3.23**
economic contract
bundling of reciprocated economic commitments (3.22) between two partners (3.51) where the abstract
specification of the proposed economic exchange (3.27) is deemed to be complete
**3.24**
economic control
association between a Person (3.52) and an economic resource (3.28) where the Person (3.52) either
owns the economic resource (3.28) or is otherwise able to derive economic benefit (utility) from it

**3.25**
economic event
occurrence in time wherein ownership of an economic resource (3.28) is transferred from one Person
(3.52) to another Person (3.52)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Occurrences in time can either: (a) be internal as mutually agreed to among the parties to a
business transaction and/or (b) reference some common publicly available and recognized date/time referencing
schema (e.g. one based on using ISO 8601 and/or ISO 19135 standards).
**3.26**
economic event type
abstract specification of an economic event (3.25) where its grouped properties can be designated
without attachment to an actual, specific occurrence in time
> *Note 1 to entry:* Examples of attributes at the type level for events might be expected-duration or standardpricing-percentage.
**3.27**
economic exchange
type of a business transaction (3.8) where the goal is an exchange of economic resources (3.28) between
two Persons (3.52) where both parties derive higher utility after the completed business transaction
(3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* An economic exchange usually involves two economic events with different types of economic
resources flowing in opposite directions. For example, an exchange of cash for a good involves a shipment with a
requited payment following.
**3.28**
economic resource
good, right, or service of value, under the control of a Person (3.52)
**3.29**
economic resource type
abstract specification of an economic resource (3.28) where its grouped properties can be designated
without attachment to an actual, specific economic resource (3.28)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Example of attributes at the type level for an economic resource like an automobile might include
its designated fuel capacity or its maximum expected range.
**3.30**
economic role
abstract specification of a Person (3.52) for economic purposes where its grouped properties can be
designated without attachment to an actual Person (3.52)
EXAMPLE
An economic role might be a qualified buyer or approved shipper, i.e. from an economic perspective
only.
**3.31**
economic specification
association between an economic commitment (3.22) and the abstract properties of an economic event
(3.25), an economic resource (3.28), a partner (3.51), or a business location (3.6)
**3.32**
entity
concrete or abstract thing that exists, did exist, or might exist including associations among these things
> *Note 1 to entry:* An entity exists whether data about it are available or not.
EXAMPLE
A person, object, event, idea, process, etc.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 2382‑17:1999, 17.02.05]*

**3.33**
external constraint
constraint (3.14) which takes precedence over internal constraints (3.38) in a business transaction (3.8),
i.e. is external to those agreed upon by the parties to a business transaction (3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Normally, external constraints are created by law, regulation, orders, treaties, conventions, or
similar instruments.
> *Note 2 to entry:* Other sources of external constraints are those of a sectorial nature, those which pertain to a
particular jurisdiction, or mutually agreed to common business conventions (e.g. INCOTERMS, exchanges, etc.).
> *Note 3 to entry:* External constraints can apply to the nature of the good, service, and/or right provided in a
business transaction.
> *Note 4 to entry:* External constraints can demand that a party to a business transaction meet specific requirements
of a particular role.
> **EXAMPLE** 1
Only a qualified medical doctor may issue a prescription for a controlled drug.
> **EXAMPLE** 2
Only an accredited share dealer may place transactions on the New York Stock Exchange.
> **EXAMPLE** 3
Hazardous wastes may only be conveyed by a licenced enterprise.
> *Note 5 to entry:* Where the Information Bundles (IBs), including their Semantic Components (SCs), of a business
transaction are also to form the whole of a business transaction (e.g. for legal or audit purposes), all constraints
must be recorded.
> **EXAMPLE** 4
There may be a legal or audit requirement to maintain the complete set of recorded information
pertaining to a business transaction, i.e. as the Information Bundles exchanged, as a “record”.
> *Note  6  to entry:* A minimum external constraint applicable to a business transaction often requires one to
differentiate whether the Person, i.e. that is a party to a business transaction, is an “individual”, “organization”, or
“public administration”. For example, privacy rights apply only to a Person as an “individual”.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.23]*
**3.34**
fulfillment
association between an economic commitment (3.22) and an economic event (3.25) where the event
executes the promised resource flow from one Person (3.52) to another
EXAMPLE
A delivery to a customer would fulfill that customer’s sale order.
**3.35**
governed
association between an economic agreement (3.19) and the business transaction (3.8) whose conduct and
phases are subject to that economic agreement (3.19)
**3.36**
individual
Person (3.52) who is a human being, i.e. a natural person, who acts as a distinct indivisible entity or is
considered as such
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.28]*
**3.37**
Information Bundle
IB
formal description of the semantics of the information to be exchanged by Open-edi Parties (3.45) playing
roles (3.60) in an Open-edi scenario (3.46)
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.11]*

**3.38**
internal constraint
constraint (3.14) which forms part of the commitment(s) (3.13) mutually agreed to among the parties to
a business transaction (3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Internal constraints are self-imposed. They provide a simplified view for modeling and re-use of
scenario components of a business transaction for which there are no external constraints or restrictions on the
nature of the conduct of a business transaction other than those mutually agreed to by the buyer and seller.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.33]*
**3.39**
location type
abstract specification of an economic location where its grouped properties can be designated without
attachment to an actual place
EXAMPLE
A location type might be an accepted shipping facility or approved hospital location.
**3.40**
materialized
association between an economic event (3.25) and an economic claim (3.21) where the occurrence of the
economic event (3.25) causes the economic claim (3.21) to come into existence
**3.41**
mediated transaction
sub-type of a business transaction (3.8) where a third party (3.65) mediates between the partners (3.51)
as mutually agreed to by the partners (3.51)
**3.42**
object
anything perceivable or conceivable
> *Note 1 to entry:* Objects may be material (e.g. an engine, a sheet of paper, a diamond), immaterial (e.g. a conversion
ratio, a project plan), or imagined (e.g. a unicorn).
*[SOURCE: ISO 1087‑1:2000, 3.1.1]*
**3.43**
Open-edi
electronic data interchange among multiple autonomous Persons (3.52) to accomplish an explicit shared
business (3.4) goal according to Open-edi standards
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.14]*
**3.44**
Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology
OeBTO
formal, rule-based specification and definition of the concepts pertaining to business transactions (3.8)
and scenarios and the relationships that hold among those concepts
**3.45**
Open-edi Party
OeP
Person (3.52) that participates in Open-edi (3.43)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Often referred to generically in this, and other eBusiness standards, (e.g., parts of the ISO/IEC 15944
multipart “eBusiness” standard) as “party” or “parties” for any entity modelled as a Person as playing a role in
Open-edi scenarios.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.17]*

**3.46**
Open-edi scenario
OeS
formal specification of a class of business transactions (3.8) having the same business (3.4) goal
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.18]*
**3.47**
organization
unique framework of authority within which a person or persons act, or are designated to act, towards
some purpose
> *Note 1 to entry:* The kinds of organizations covered by this part of ISO/IEC 15944 include the following examples.
> **EXAMPLE** 1
An organization incorporated under law.
> **EXAMPLE** 2
An unincorporated organization or activity providing goods and/or services including: (a)
partnerships, (b) social or other non-profit organizations or similar bodies in which ownership or control is
vested in a group of individuals, (c) sole proprietorships, and (d) governmental bodies;
> **EXAMPLE** 3
Groupings of the above types of organizations where there is a need to identify these in information
interchange.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 6523‑1:1998, 3.1]*
**3.48**
organization part
any department, service, or other entity (3.32) within an organization (3.47), which needs to be identified
for information interchange
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 6523‑1:1998, 3.2]*
**3.49**
organization Person
organization part (3.48) which has the properties of a Person (3.52) and thus is able to make commitments
(3.13) on behalf of that organization (3.47)
> *Note 1 to entry:* An organization can have one or more organization Persons.
> *Note 2 to entry:* An organization Person is deemed to represent and act on behalf of the organization and to do so
in a specified capacity.
> *Note 3 to entry:* An organization Person can be a “natural person” such as an employee or officer of the organization.
> *Note 4 to entry:* An organization Person can be a legal person, i.e. another organization.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.46]*
**3.50**
participates
association between an economic event (3.25) and each of the two Persons (3.52) participating in the
economic event (3.25)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Usually there is a “from” association and a “to” association, depending upon the direction of the
flow of the economic resource.
**3.51**
partner
sub-type of Person (3.52) that includes buyer (3.11) and seller (3.61)

**3.52**
Person
entity (3.32), i.e. a natural or legal person, recognized by law as having legal rights and duties, able to
make commitment(s) (3.13), assume and fulfill resulting obligation(s), and able to be held accountable
for its action(s)
> *Note 1 to entry:* Synonyms for “legal person” include “artificial person”, “body corporate”, etc., depending on the
terminology used in competent jurisdictions.
> *Note 2 to entry:* Person is capitalized to indicate that it is being utilized as formally defined in the standards and
to differentiate it from its day-to-day use.
> *Note 3 to entry:* Minimum and common external constraints applicable to a business transaction often require
one to differentiate among three common subtypes of Person, namely, “individual”, “organization”, and “public
administration”.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.47]*
**3.53**
process
series of actions or events taking place in a defined manner leading to the accomplishment of an expected
result
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.53]*
**3.54**
public administration
entity (3.32), i.e. a Person (3.52), which is an organization (3.47) and has the added attribute of being
authorized to act on behalf of a regulator (3.57)
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.54]*
**3.55**
reciprocal
association between economic commitments (3.22) where the promise by one partner (3.51) to execute
an economic resource (3.28) transfer in the future is reciprocated by the other partner (3.51) promising
a requited transfer in the opposite direction
**3.56**
recorded information
any information that is recorded on or in a medium, irrespective of form, recording medium, or
technology utilized, and in a manner allowing for storage and retrieval
> *Note 1 to entry:* This is a generic definition and is independent of any ontology (e.g. those of “facts” versus “data”
versus “information” versus “intelligence” versus “knowledge”, etc.).
> *Note 2 to entry:* Through the use of the term “information”, all attributes of this term are inherited in this definition.
> *Note  3  to entry:* This definition covers: (a) any form of recorded information, means of recording, and any
medium on which information can be recorded and (b) all types of recorded information including all data types,
instructions, or software databases, etc.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.56]*
**3.57**
regulator
Person (3.52) who has the authority to prescribe external constraints (3.33) which serve as principles,
policies, or rules governing or prescribing the behavior of Persons (3.52) involved in a business transaction
(3.8), as well as the provisioning of goods, services, and/or rights interchanged
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.59]*

**3.58**
resource-flow
association between an economic event (3.25) and an economic resource (3.28)
EXAMPLE
A resource-flow between some inventory and the shipment that caused control of that inventory
to flow from one Person to another.
**3.59**
responsibility
association between Persons (3.52) where one is responsible for the other or between a Person (3.52)
and an organization Person (3.49) where that Person (3.52) is assigned
> *Note  1  to entry:* Sub-types of Persons include individuals, organizations, and public administrations. An
“individual” is non-divisible but organizations and public administrations are and as such will assign specific
responsibilities to organization Persons.
> *Note 2 to entry:* See ISO/IEC 15944-1, 6.2.7 and Figure 17.
**3.60**
role
specification which models an external intended behaviour (as allowed within a scenario) of an Open-edi
Party (3.45)
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.25]*
**3.61**
seller
Person (3.52) who aims to hand over, voluntarily or in response to a demand or a request, a good, service,
and/or right to another Person (3.52) and in return receives an acceptable equivalent value, usually in
money, for the good, service, and/or right provided
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.62]*
**3.62**
Semantic Component
SC
unit of recorded information (3.56) unambiguously defined in the context of the business (3.4) goal of the
business transaction (3.8)
> *Note 1 to entry:* An SC may be atomic or composed of other SCs.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.27]*
**3.63**
settlement
association between a requiting economic event (3.25) and an economic claim (3.21) where the occurrence
of the event causes the economic claim (3.21) to expire
**3.64**
site
association between an economic event (3.25) and the business location (3.6) where the transfer of
economic resources (3.28) involved in that event is deemed to have occurred
**3.65**
third party
Person (3.52) besides the two primarily concerned in a business transaction (3.8) who is agent (3.1) of
neither and who fulfills a specified role or function as mutually agreed to by the two primary Persons
(3.52) or as a result of external constraints (3.33)
> *Note 1 to entry:* It is understood that more than two Persons can at times be primary parties in a business
transaction.

*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944‑1:2011, 3.65]*
**3.66**
typification
association between a concrete entity (3.32) and the abstract specification of its grouped properties
**3.67**
undefined market model
trade model where participants are not registered in advance and where that market does not have
accepted and recognized sources for business rules and conventions

## 4	 Symbols and abbreviations

For the purposes of this document, the following symbols and abbreviations apply:
AAA
American Accounting Association
BDV
Business Domain View
BRV
Business Requirements View
BOV
Business Operational View
BTE
Business Transaction Entity
BTET
Business Transaction Entity Type
BTV
Business Transaction View
ebXML
electronic business eXtended Markup Language
ECIMF
E-Commerce Integration Meta-Framework
EDI
Electronic Data Interchange
IB
Information Bundle
IPD
Information Processing Domain
IPR
Intellectual Propery Rights
OCL
Object Constraint Language
OeBTO
Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology
OeDT
Open-edi Descriptive Technique
OeP
Open-edi Party
OeS
Open-edi Scenario
REA
Resource-Event-Agent
SC
Semantic Component
UML
Unified Modeling Language
UMM
UN/CEFACT Modelling Methodology
UN
United Nations
UN/CEFACT
United Nations Centre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business

## 5	 The declarative component of an OeBTO — Primitive and derived data classes

### 5.1	 Person and economic resources

One of the most fundamental ideas in Open-edi is the category of Person as an entity recognized as
having legal rights and duties, able to make commitments, and fulfill resulting obligations. Based on
applicable external constraints, a Person can be decomposed into three separate sub-types, namely,

“individual”, “organization”, and “public administration”5). These sub-types are illustrated in the UML
class diagram of Figure 4.
In this part of ISO/IEC 15944, the focus is on the OeBTO from an internal constraints perspective only6).
However, users of this part of ISO/IEC 15944 should note that where and whenever Person is utilized, it
covers the three sub-types of individual, organization, and public administration.
*[Figure 4 — Sub-types of Person based on external constraints]*

> **Rule 1:** Irrespective of the use of any particular information technology and related devices, Persons shall be the only entities which are legally recognized as able to make commitments, able to agree to the rights and obligations entered into, and able to be held accountable for their actions, etc., i.e., Persons are the only entities able to participate in a business transaction and able to make commitments for exchanges of value7). Persons are the entities who drive the economic exchanges forward in Open-edi collaborations. Ontologically and normatively, they are considered as homo economicus in the classical microeconomic sense; that is, they are parties interested in commercial activity as a means of maximizing utility. Besides Person, a second very important notion in the OeBTO is the concept of an economic resource which is something of value under the control of a Person. These two fundamental categories appear on the left of Figure 5, connected by an economic control relationship which indicates that the Person either owns the resource or is otherwise able to derive economic value (utility) from it. 5) See further in ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 6.2 “Rules governing Person” and in particular, 6.2.7 “Person and external contraints: individual, organization and public administration.” 6) With respect to incorporating external constraints, see further ISO/IEC 15944-5:2008; in particular, see

#### 5.2.2 “Collaboration space — internal constraints only” and 5.2.3 “Collaboration space — the role of “regulator”

representing “external contraints”, and Annex G.
This Rule 1 is based on ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 6.2, Rule 11.

*[Figure 5 — Person and economic resource as the basis for exchange]*
Onto the right side of Figure 5 (inside the dotted lines) is now added an additional Person and economic
resource association, thus setting the stage for a possible exchange where both parties might view
control of the other Person’s resource as a means of deriving higher utility than present circumstances
render. This “value exchange” as it is titled in the collaboration space of Figure 3 is the basis for what
Open-edi calls a business transaction between the two Persons.

> **Rule 2:** An Open-edi Business Transaction is an economic exchange occasioned by the presence of two Persons as trading partners, each possessing a resource of value desirable to the other party, and these Persons shall be autonomous parties with competing economic interests, able to commit to a requited exchange with the other Person. The Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology does not construct exhaustive classification hierarchies for the primitive classes of Person and economic resource, but it does provide a limited taxonomy for both. The hierarchical decomposition of both of these ontology items beyond 2-3 levels becomes very dependent upon the context of industry structure. Particular decompositions beyond the second or third level may be joined to the minimum classification structures illustrated here to give more detailed taxonomies for a particular industry domain. In addition to being classified on identity, Persons may also be classified on the basis of their roles, which are the abstract specification of the functions they perform in business transactions. This functional decomposition through three levels is illustrated in the UML class diagram of Figure 6 and explained below. —	 Partner which itself further specializes to Buyer (has money, desires goods) and Seller (has goods, desires money). —	 Regulator which represents Persons who impose external constraints on Business Transactions. —	 Third Party which specializes to a number of other classes such as Escrow, Guarantor, Mediator, and Notary. —	 Agent which is a special sub-type in Open-edi that can act for any other Person in a clearly specified capacity, most commonly for a buyer or a seller.

*[Figure 6 — Sub-types of Person based on roles in a business transaction]*
When fully-specified business transactions occur, Persons are able to play roles as indicated by the
different sub-typing shown in Figure 6. Again, this taxonomy could be extended with industry-specific
specializations of these role levels8).
Figure 7 illustrates some of the possible sub-typing for the other OeBTO primitive – economic resource –
illustrated in Figure 5. This taxonomy has a second level derived directly from the text of 15944-1 which
categorizes resources as:
- Goods which are tangible resources to include:
- Materials including capital assets (like trucks), basic raw materials and natural resources
(like steel or petroleum) plus sub-components of a larger assembled product (like seats for an
automobile).
- Funds like money or marketable securities.
- Real Estate like office buildings or warehouses.
- Services which are the provision of value-adding activities by a seller to a buyer to include:
- Regulatory Services such as the right to import/export or the right to do business in a certain
segment or area.
- Transportation Services like packing/picking or actual shipments.
- Human Services like temporary workers or consultants.
- Warranty Services such as the automatic provision of replacement goods under faulty judgments.
- Insurance Services such as guaranteed payment under exigent circumstances.
- Rights which are intangible resources to include examples like Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
and Rights-of-way.9)
Because of this industry specificity, these hierarchical decompositions should be viewed as informative
rather than normative. This is especially true of the decomposition of “third party” where industry specificity gives
rise to many different types of role names.
Again as in Figure  6, these hierarchical decompositions should be viewed as informative rather than
normative. This is especially true of the third level decomposition in Figure 7 which is clearly designed as an example
enumeration.

*[Figure 7 — Sub-types (possible) for economic resource]*

> **Rule 3:** Economic resources shall be classified as goods, services or rights; particular industry level classifications can further specialize this first level of decomposition.

Figure 7 also shows a recursive association that is especially important in ontological terms because
it reflects an important aspect of economic reality -- that economic resources often have component
structures. This means that their value is often derived from an assemblage of other resources. For a
product example, those components could be the physical material, its advertised cache, its deliveredto-the-door-status, and its warranty.

> **Rule 4:** Economic resources in the vast majority of trading cases shall have component structures that can be identified and treated differentially in economic exchanges. As an example of the logic of Rule 4, example goods that are termed free-on-board at source (FOB source) would be missing a delivery component that free-on-board destination (FOB destination) would have included. In Open-edi, a business transaction involves an economic exchange of resources between Persons with competing economic interests, each attempting to maximize his or her own economic utility. As portrayed in 15944-1 and shown in Figure 8, there are two additional fundamental elements of a Business Transaction Model besides PERSON (discussed amply above). The first of these is the DATA involved in the transaction, and the ontological categories for capturing that data will be the topic for the rest of this Clause 5. The other fundamental element is the PROCESS involved in a business transaction and that will be the main topic for the following Clause 6. Clause 7 illustrates the constraint component where the business rules concerning both data and processes are enumerated.

*[Figure 8 — Fundamental parts of a business transaction]*

### 5.2	 The normative data categories for a business transaction involving an economic

exchange: resources, events, and Persons plus their fundamental relationships
The UML class diagram of Figure 9 illustrates the high level semantic view of the essentials of an
economic exchange. In Open-edi, the full details of this exchange are realized within the scope of a single
business transaction as trading partners identify each other, negotiate commitments, and engage in the
actual exchange of resources with value.
As a starting point for ontological definition, this collaboration space diagram concentrates on the object
answers to four fundamental questions:
- Who is involved in the collaboration (Persons)?
- What is being exchanged in the collaboration (economic resources)?
- When (and under what trading conditions) do the components of the exchange occur (economic
events)?
- Why are the trading partners engaged in the collaboration (duality relationships between resource
flows)?
The normative infrastructure of the Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology (OeBTO) encompasses
these essential question components, as explained in 5.3 that follows. Clause 5.4 illustrates the
ontological components that result from typifying the OeBTO normative infrastructure, while 5.5 deals
with the non-normative extensions of claims and business locations. Clause 5.6 discusses the elaborate
commitment structures of the OeBTO, and 5.7 accounts for the extended ontology objects of scenarios
and markets.
Figure 9 illustrates the basic economic primitives of OeBTO in a UML class diagram. An actual value
exchange in the collaboration space of Open-edi between a buyer and a seller would involve two
instances of this object pattern. That is, there would a resource-event-Person pattern instance for an
initial resource transfer from one partner to the other; this would then be followed by a connected
(with duality associations) resource-event-Person pattern instance for a requiting resource transfer.
A full example of this is shown in Figure 10 with a delivery of product followed by a payment of cash.
In very general terms, a full economic exchange of value in collaboration space is defined as a business
transaction in the Open-edi ontology. It is important to remember that bilateral ransactions between a
buyer and a seller constitute the basic collaborative unit in Open-edi. These bilateral transactions may
be aggregated to mediated transactions involving more than two Persons.

*[Figure 9 — Basic exchange primitives of the Open-edi ontology]*
*[Figure 10 — Exchange of value in collaboration space involves two symmetrical clusters]*
5.2.1
Entity definitions:
- a) A Person is a natural or legal person unit empowered to control the flow of economic resources
(including his or her own labor) by engaging in economic events. Persons are also empowered to
make commitments or promises to execute resource flows in the future. The Person class may also
include persons who are responsible for subordinates’ participation in economic events. A sub-set
of Person is partner; partners are Persons who play the leading roles in business transactions as
sellers and buyers (or alternatively, as producers and consumers of services).
- b) An economic resource is a scarce good, right, or service that possesses utility (economic value) and
that is presently under the identifiable control of a particular Person.
- c)
An economic event most simply is an inflow or outflow of an economic resource. Economic events
reflect changes in economic resources resulting from exchanges, conversions, or transportation.

5.2.2
Relationship definitions:
- a) A resource-flow relationship is an association between an economic resource and an economic
event. From the independent perspective, resource-flow instances are matched in bi-directional
fashion with each party both giving and taking in the same exchange.
- b) A participates relationship is an association between a Person and an economic event. Economic
events normally have two participates relationships with independent parties who have competing
economic interests (that is, they are said to have an arm’s length relationship with each other). One
of these is specialized on the class diagram of Figure 9 as “from” and the other as “to”, indicating
again the independent perspective of collaboration.
- c)
A duality relationship is an association between two (or more) economic events where one is the
economic or legal consideration for the other in an economic exchange. Dualities are needed for
every binary component of mediated transactions.
- d) A custody relationship is an association between a Person and an economic resource where physical
control or access to physical control possession is indicated.
- e) Responsibility is a relationship between (among) two or more Persons. These responsibility
associations indicate hierarchical orderings within an enterprise that are necessarily revealed to
trading partners in a collaboration model.

> **Rule 5:** The minimum normative constellation of business transaction entities needed for a valid business transaction are economic resources, economic events, and Persons plus their exchange relationships (resource-flow, duality, and participates).

> **Rule 6:** Custody and responsibility relationships are not required for a valid economic exchange, but they may provide critical additional data to the basic exchange template.

### 5.3	 Addition of business event to basic exchange pattern

In Figure  11, the primitive business event has been added to the basic OeBT ontology pattern in a
UML class diagram. A business event is an occurrence in time in collaboration space that Persons wish
to plan, control, monitor, or evaluate. To bring about the occurrence of an economic event, it is often
necessary to perform multiple business events. Additionally, business events may also be aggregates of
other, finer-grained business events, so the UML component structure for a business workflow is shown
as recursive business events. In a state machine sense where many elements of the OeBTO become
business transaction entities (representing business transaction entity types as explained in Clause 6)
with defined object states and defined object lifecycles, a business event can be defined more precisely
as an occurrence that causes a state change in one or more business transaction entities.

> **Rule 7:** Business events shall either occur instantaneously or have duration and so for a business event that has duration, it shall be possible to specify as its components, both starting and finishing events of instantaneous nature.

*[Figure 11 — Addition of business event to basic business transaction pattern]*

### 5.4	 Extension of the OeBTO into types

Abstract concepts are information structures used to describe the intangible components of actual
phenomena. For ontologists, this is an important distinction. In the OeBT ontology, “type images” are
used to represent the abstract structure of economic phenomena. For the construction of abstract
concepts, the common abstraction mechanism of typification10) is used. This abstraction method is
portrayed in Figure 12.
The bottom of Figure 12 represents things that really exist or have actually happened, like a digital
product or some real material or an event that has transferred ownership of such resources. In concrete
economic terms, this is where accountability for past and near future activities lies. At the top of the
figure is where policies are specified in terms of the abstract economic future: things that could be or
should happen. Typification works by abstractly specifying the grouped properties of real things, and
policies can then be derived by associating those abstract entities.
In the UML class diagram of Figure 13, three of the economic primitives defined previously (economic
resource, economic event, and Person), are typified to produce their abstract specification classes shown
at the top of the figure (economic resource type, economic event type, and economic role).
See explanation of typification in Geerts, G., and McCarthy W.E., Policy-level specifications in REA Enterprise
Information Systems. Journal of Information Systems, 2006, 20(2) pp.37-63. (2006).

*[Figure 12 — Abstract specification with typification]*
When type images are connected with each other as illustrated in the top constellation of Figure 13,
policy artifacts often emerge, such as the association between an economic event type (for example,
large amount sales) and an economic role (such as the managerial position needed to authorize such a
class of transactions). This kind of abstract specification is especially important to the pre-actualization
components (planning, identification, and negotiation) of an Open-edi business transaction. For example,
parties often specify in advance the types of goods they desire to be shipped under different delivery
categories by different types of shipping agencies. Typification is strongly linked to the concept of Openedi Scenarios which are formal specifications of particular classes of business transactions designed
for reusability. As discussed below in Clause 6, connected type images also result many times in control
artifacts such as the rules embodied in internal and external Open-edi constraints. Such constraints
supply pre- and post-conditions on state machine transitions.
*[Figure 13 — Type connections for business policy]*

> **Rule 8:** Typification is a non-normative extension of the components of a basic economic exchange; thus connecting typified entities may specify the abstract rules or business policies under which business transactions occur.

### 5.5	 Locations and claims

The UML class diagram of Figure  14 illustrates two non-normative additions to the basic Open-edi
ontological framework; namely:
- a) a business location designates the site where an economic event occurs if such information is
needed. Locations also indicate the targeted delivery points for Economic Commitments. Location
Types indicate grouped instances like an approved kind of delivery warehouse or an acceptable
medical facility.
- b) an economic claim is an optional materialization of a temporal imbalance in a duality relationship
where an economic event has occurred without its requited correspondence to another economic
event. An initial economic event materializes the claim, while the requiting economic event settles
it.
*[Figure 14 — Addition of business location and economic claim]*

### 5.6	 Adding commitments to economic exchanges

In the Open-edi ontology, a business transaction pertains to the exchange of something of value as
illustrated in the delivery-payment example of Figure 10. An additional key property of an Open-edi
business transaction is that it involves commitment exchange as illustrated in Figure 15. In economic
terms however, commitments do not occur in isolation because partners simply do not agree to value
exchanges without reciprocation. Commitments are bundled in economic contracts between trading
partners where, for example, a commitment to deliver some product is reciprocated by a commitment
to pay cash.

*[Figure 15 — Contract as a bundle of commitments]*

> **Rule 9:** Economic commitments are fulfilled by economic events; these commitments are the promised analog of economic events which are connected by duality relationships; and thus, commitments also shall occur in reciprocal pairs where the promise of one party is requited by the promise of the other. In Figure 16, the ex ante nature of commitments is illustrated further. At a minimum, an Open-edi economic commitment should specify the type of economic resource expected in the fulfilling economic event. For example, a catalogue order chooses from a product list for delivery. Additionally, the economic commitment often will specify: a)	 the type of event to fulfill it (such as an expedited delivery or a purchase under wholesale pricing), and b)	 the business roles needed in the eventual exchange (such as a buyer, a seller, a seller agent, and a third-party escrow). Economic commitments may less commonly specify types of locations, like an approved class of warehouses.

*[Figure 16 — Abstract specification of commitments]*

### 5.7	 Business transactions with contracts

The UML class diagram of Figure 17 formally adds economic commitment structures to the basic notion
of an economic exchange. As mentioned previously, commitment is one of the defining features of Openedi, so these structures are extremely important ontological components.
- a) An economic commitment is a promise to execute an economic event at some point in the future.
The specification of an economic commitment may involve relationships with four type-level
classes: economic resource type, location type, economic event type, and economic role. Economic
commitments may also have relationships with economic resource (reserves), Person (participate),
and business location (target).
- b) A fulfillment relationship is an association between an economic commitment and the economic
event that executes that commitment.
- c)
A reciprocal relationship is an association between economic commitments that each in turn
individually fulfills compensating economic events.
- d) An economic contract is a bundle of reciprocating commitments wherein two parties agree to a
future schedule of exchanges with compensating economic events. An agreement is similar to an
economic contract, but it is not legally enforceable.
- e) An economic bundle relationship is an association between an economic contract and its pair of
reciprocal economic commitments.

*[Figure 17 — Business transaction model with bundled commitments]*

> **Rule 10:** An economic contract is a reification of the reciprocal relationship among groups of economic commitments; however when the paired commitments have simple structures and there are no legal needs for a formal agreement, the economic contract entity becomes optional.

Figure 18 illustrates the full addition of the “commitments to type specification” by combining Figures
16 and 17. Additionally, it extends the concept of a bilateral transaction to that of a mediated transaction
by including the previously-defined third party role of a Person as an essential ingredient of mediated
collaborations. Figure 18 also indicates the essential roles of regulators who are Persons who constrain
business transactions.

*[Figure 18 — Collaboration with commitment structures]*

> **Rule 11:** A bilateral business transaction shall include just the two basic kinds of partner: the buyer and the seller (or an agent for one or both); mediated business collaborations may involve the participation of a third party like a guarantor or a notary.

> **Rule 12:** All Open-edi business transactions, which include the modeling of external constraints in addition to internal constraints only, are subject to the participation of a regulator – a Person with the authority to prescribe external constraints which serve as principles or rules governing the behaviour of other types of participants in a business transaction.

### 5.8	 Typifying agreements and business transactions

Figure 19 and Figure 20 illustrate typification of economic agreements and business transactions.
- a) All business transactions are set in both defined markets and undefined markets, both of which are
overseen by various jurisdictional domains.
- b) Business transactions may be classified into different kinds of Open-edi scenarios such as the 2x2x2
(overall giving eight combinations) factoring shown in the cloud at the bottom of Figure 1911).
- c)
An agreement can be decomposed into classes like leases/rentals, service agreements, consignments,
and purchases. Agreements have pricing methods like reverse auctions, open and closed bids, and
individual quotes. These methods can in turn be typified into classes (Pricing) like bid, auction, or
matching. These are all illustrated in Figure 20.
A more complete explanation of this classification scheme for Open-edi scenarios is given in ISO/IEC 159441, Clause 6.6 “Primitive classification and identification of Open-edi scenarios”.

The modeling specifications illustrated in Figure 4 through Figure 20 give specific conceptual definition
to many of the Open-edi business transaction terms used in ISO/IEC 15944-1. In the following clause,
the behavioural use of these components is explained with explicit reference to the Open-edi notion
of business transaction phases. According to ISO/IEC  15944-1, a business transaction proceeds
through the stages of planning, identification, negotiation, actualization, and post-actualization, and an
ontologically-based state machine model of this progress is explained there.
*[Figure 19 — Addition of markets and scenarios for business transactions]*
*[Figure 20 — Agreement types with pricing methods]*

## 6	 The procedural component of an OeBTO — Business transaction state machines

An ontology has a declarative component – which specifies the categories into which collaboration
data exchanged among Persons in a business transaction may be slotted; a procedural component –
which specifies how that data is to be used in deriving conclusions; and a constraint component – which
specifies the business rules for both data and procedures. In an operational use of the Open-edi Business
Transaction Ontology, the various declarative components specified in Clause 5 – for example all of the
classes illustrated in Figure 18 – become defined as business transaction entity types (BTET). BTETs
represent the abstract specification of business transaction entities (BTE), detailing their recommended
attributes, their recommended methods, and their recommended life-cycle states. Additionally, a
business transaction entity type will usually specify the types of business events that cause a BTE of
this type to proceed through its different states as the business transaction itself progresses through
its own phases of planning, identification, negotiation, actualization, and post-actualization. A BTE thus
is a particular real instance of a business transaction entity type.

> **Rule 13:** A business transaction entity (BTE) shall be viewed and defined as the computable representation of any real world entity that participates, occurs, or is materialized during a particular business transaction, and for procedural materialization of conclusions during a business transaction, the combined use of the BTE attributes, methods, and states shall be used to determine its status as a component in an economic exchange.

### 6.1	 Relating ontological components to the Open-edi business transaction phases

From ISO/IEC  15944-1, the paragraphs below enumerate the five identified phases of an Open-edi
business transaction12). This phase specification is one of the major building blocks of ISO/IEC 15944-1.
- a) Planning: In the planning phase, both the buyer and seller are engaged in activities to decide what
action to take for acquiring or selling a good, service, and/or right.
- b) Identification: The identification phase pertains to all those actions or events whereby data is
interchanged among potential buyers and sellers in order to establish a one-to-one linkage.
- c)
Negotiation: The negotiation phase pertains to all those actions and events involving the exchange of
information following the identification phase where a potential buyer and seller have (1) identified
the nature of good(s) and/or service(s) to be provided; and, (2) identified each other at a level of
certainty. The process of negotiation is directed at achieving an explicit, mutually-understood, and
agreed-upon goal of a business collaboration and associated terms and conditions. This may include
such things as the detailed specification of the good, service, and/or right, quantity, pricing, after
sales servicing, delivery requirements, financing, use of agents and/or third parties, etc.
- d) Actualization: The actualization phase pertains to all activities or events necessary for the execution
of the results of the negotiation for an actual business transaction. Normally the seller produces or
assembles the goods, starts providing the services, prepares and completes the delivery of good,
service, and/or right, etc., to the buyer as agreed according to the terms and conditions agreed upon
at the termination of the negotiationphase. Likewise, the buyer begins the transfer of acceptable
equivalent value, usually in money, to the seller providing the good, service, and/or right.
- e) Post-Actualization: The post-Actualization phase includes all of the activities or events and
associated exchanges of information that occur between the buyer and the seller after the
agreed upon good, service, and/or right is deemed to have been delivered. These can be activities
pertaining to warranty coverage, service after sales, post-sales financing such as monthly payments
or other financial arrangements, consumer complaint handling and redress or some general postactualization relationships between buyer and seller.
*[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15944-1, Clause 6.3 “Rules governing the process component”.]*

> **Rule 14:** Conceptually, a business transaction shall be considered to be constructed from a set of fundamental activities which are planning, identification, negotiation, actualization and postactualization.

Figure 21 adds the definition of these business transaction phases to the OeBTO declarative primitives
for a bilateral collaboration.
*[Figure 21 — Open-edi ontology with business transaction phases and business events]*
Figure 21 also specifies that these Open-edi business process phases have business events as components,
illustrating the behavioral progress through each phase as marked by collaborative activities. A
business event is defined as an occurrence in time that partners to a business transaction wish to
monitor or control. Business events are the fuel that drives a business transaction state machine, as they
progress that dynamic representation through its five phases by changing the states of the ontological
components illustrated in Figure  21. Additionally, business events have component structures as
illustrated by the recursive relationships in Figure 21, and this facilitates the modeling of activities in
business collaboration space at whatever level of granularity is needed. Business event components
of instant duration can drive the state of a higher-level business event with extended duration from
start to completion, and that higher level component may then effect a state change in one of the other
business transaction entities for a particular transaction.
Figure 22 illustrates the approximate correspondence of the Open-edi business transaction phases with
the categories of ontological components defined in Clause 5.

*[Figure 22 — ISO Open-edi phases with components]*
- Planning and identification involve business events wherein potential buyers and sellers identify
each other by matching on proposed types of resources to be exchanged and their actual trading
partners.
- Negotiation involves business events wherein linked business partners cooperate on the abstract
specification of their proposed exchange (its type of resources, events, and roles as stipulated in a
contract).
- Actualization and post-actualization involve business events that aggregate to the performance of
resource transfers (the actual economic events) between the buyer and seller.
Business events are the specific activities that mark the explicit states that trading partners expose
to each other as they complete an exchange. For example, supplying a quote on a listed product during
negotiation may progress an economic commitment from status (or state) “unspecified” to “proposed”
while simultaneously marking a resource type and an event type as “specified”. If this business event
of supplying a quote was followed by a quote acceptance and then a payment terms acceptance, an
economic contract might move into status “in-force” and then the entire negotiation phase might move
into state “completed.” This completed negotiation would keep the entire business transaction in state
“in progress,” whereas an unsuccessful negotiation might have moved the overall business transaction
into state “aborted” or state “suspended.”

> **Rule 15:** Business events are the activities or messages that collaborative business partners shall use to communicate their progress through a business transaction.

Figure 23 portrays the individual phases of a business transaction and the targeted object states that
would signal to each business partner that a particular phase was now complete.
- a) Planning is complete when both trading partners have formulated an abstract vision of an exchange.
This involves moving the entities representing the potential partner and the potential type of
resource into “candidate” states.

- b) Identification is complete when the corresponding partners have been identified along with their
identified resource types. This establishes a 1-to-1 linkage between the partners concerning a
common trading interest.
- c)
Negotiation is complete when the abstract specification of economic commitments is done and when
all the commitments and a contract move to an “in-force” condition. Generally, this would mean that
the entities for the types of resources to be exchanged are in state “specified.” It could also mean
that economic specifications are complete for the type of event, the economic roles, and the types of
location.
- d) Actualization is complete when the requiting economic event entities are both in state “complete,”
thus marking the completion of the full exchange.
- e) Post-Actualization is complete when the possible warranty (or similar post-exchange exception
condition) component of an economic resource is invoked, and the conditions of the exchange reach
their final values.
*[Figure 23 — Phases of a business transaction and object states for completion]*
Figure  24 illustrates how the declarative ontological components of Open-edi (referred to here as
business transaction entity types) can be augmented to account for state machine mechanics. Each
ontological component is envisioned as a possible business transaction entity with a defined business
transaction entity lifecycle consisting of multiple business transaction entity states. The transition to
these states is effected by the occurrence of a business event.

*[Figure 24 — Business transaction entities, lifecycles, states, and events]*
Figure 25 illustrates some example states that could be identified for some of the Open-edi Ontology
components defined thus far. In a full ontological specification, all of the business transaction entity
types defined in this document would be given fully-enumerated lifecycles of object states (as specified
in Figure 24). However, these would change from one business context to another, so the exposition here
is limited to these four samples.

> **Rule 16:** In the OeBTO, all declarative components shall become candidates for business transaction entities, and each of these in turn shall have a defined life cycle of states that shall mark its progressive use in the representation of a real economic exchange.

*[Figure 25 — Sample states for business transaction entities]*
Figure 26 lists an example set of business events involved in a typical instance of a business transaction.
These 14 business events represent a full collaboration between an example buyer and seller, as it
proceeds through the Open-edi phases. Again, each business event might cause multiple state changes.
For example:
- a) The fourth activity – Buyer sends Availability and Price Request to Seller – would cause:
- 1) the economic resource type to move into its Specified state, plus
- 2) the identification phase to move into its In-Force state.
- b) The ninth activity – Buyer sends an Order Acceptance to Seller for parts – would cause:
- 1) the economic resource types, the economic event types, and the economic roles to move into
their Specified states, plus
- 2) the economic contract and the economic commitment entities to move into their In-Force states.
- c)
The eleventh activity – Buyer sends Receiving Report to Seller when inspected goods are accepted
– would cause the economic event to move into its Completed state, and the economic resource to
move into its Transferred state.

*[Figure 26 — Example business transaction with business events grouped in phases]*
A UML state machine diagram is the best formal specification of dynamic object behavior with state
changes. Such a specification is illustrated in Figure 27 for the business entity type “economic resource
type” as it moves through the example collaboration.
- a) The economic resource type (for example a type of inventory) would become a Candidate when the
Publish-Catalog event occurs, moving from its initial undefined state (black dot).
- b) The Send-Availability-And-Price-Request event would then move the inventory into state Planned.
This same event would move the identification phase of the business transaction into state In-Service
(not shown in Figure 27).
- c)
The Return-Availability-And-Price-Result would cause the inventory to become Identified. This
same event would move the identification phase of the business transaction into state Complete (not
shown).
- d) The Send-Offer event would shift the example inventory into its Proposed state.
- e) The Accept-Offer would cause the economic resource type to become Specified.
- f)
And finally, a Send-Shipping-Notice action would cause the resource type to move to an Actualization
state (end of object life cycle).13)
In reality, this state machine example for economic inventory type is slightly more complicated as the
individual state changes would need to be tracked through a UML association class between the economic inventory
type and the business transaction.

*[Figure 27 — State machine diagram for economic resource type]*
Figure 27 illustrates the progress of a collaboration between two trading partners from the perspective
of one business transaction entity as it progresses through its state changes. Figures 28-31 provide a
different, but much more comprehensive view of progress through the first three phases (planning,
identification, and negotiation)14) of the same business transaction15). Each of these figures illustrates
a UML activity graph with various business events (such as “Publish-Catalog” at the top right of
Figure 28) being performed by either the buying partner (left column) or the selling partner (right
column). The collaboration space between the buyer and seller (first illustrated in Figure 3) is where
the shared business entity states reside that allow each partner to determine simultaneously what the
exact status of the overall business collaboration is. For example in Figure 28, the Publish-Catalog event
at the upper right causes the entity economic resource type to move into state Candidate (as earlier
illustrated in Figure 27) and the entity planning phase to move into state Waiting Start. For purposes of
parsimony, Figures 28-31 do not illustrate all of the state changes that would occur in a collaboration,
only an illustrative subset. For example, it would commonly be the case that the Completed state of one
transaction phase (such as identification) would cause the following phase (such as negotiation) to move
into a Waiting Start state. However, this state transition is not shown.
The exposition here is limited to these first three phases for parsimony sake. Including the phases of
actualization and post-actualization would make the activity documentation twice as long with little gained in
explanation power.
Figures 28-31 are intended to be read consecutively. For example, the start of Figure 29 (illustrated as a
filled-in circle) connects with the finish of Figure 28 (illustrated as a target circle).

*[Figure 28 — Activity graph (1) for collaboration]*

*[Figure 29 — Activity graph (2) for collaboration]*

*[Figure 30 — Activity graph (3) for collaboration]*

*[Figure 31 — Activity graph (4) for collaboration]*
To summarize the state machine presentation, it is necessary to understand how the definitions of
Clause 5 and Clause 6 work together.
- a) Clause 5 defined the declarative components of the Open-edi ontology. This is a specification of the
primitive classes as they model the components of a business transaction. These primitive classes
become candidates for business transaction entity types, and their realization during an actual
business collaboration would become business transaction entities.
- b) Clause 6 defined the procedural components of the Open-edi ontology. This illustrated the dynamic
mechanics of tracking business collaboration through each of the five Open-edi phases using state
machine mechanics. This progress was illustrated with the UML, first from the perspective of a
single business transaction entity (state machine diagram) and second from the perspective of the
entire workflow (activity graphs).

With partners communicating with each other through shared states of business transaction entities,
the actual status of an Open-edi collaboration is exactly determined for each at any point in time.

> **Rule 17:** In the OeBTO, the declarative components – the business transaction entities – and the procedural components – the shared collaboration space state machines – shall work in tandem to fully track the activities and progress in an economic exchange. A realization of the OeBTO may require an integrated specification of both features – declarations and procedures — in the conduct of an Open-edi business transaction.

## 7	 The constraint component of an OeBTO — Incorporating business rules into

business transactions

### 7.1	 Business rules and Open-edi constraints

Business rules specifying computational procedures, approved sequences of actions, valid inferences,
and effective control monitoring govern the day-to-day operations of business enterprises. A useful
definition of a “business rule” from Eriksson and Penker (2000:81) is:
… a statement that can control or affect the execution of a business process as well as the structure
of the resources in a business. The statement specifies a condition that must be upheld, or a
condition that controls which activity should follow next. It can express a business goal, specify the
way a process should execute, detail the conditions of a relationship, or constrain the behavior of a
resource.
In the database world somewhat synonymously, “constraints” are defined as rules governing the
integrity of data that prevent a database from moving from one representation state to another without
proper validation, and in the most simple ontological case, their function is exactly congruous with the
business rules definition given above. Database integrity constraints are also commonly referred to as
assertions.
In ISO/IEC 15944-1, a constraint is defined as “a rule, explicitly stated, that prescribes, limits, governs,
or specifies any aspect of a business transaction.” That same standard differentiates those constraints
that are self imposed by the trading parties (internal) from those constraints created by law, regulation,
orders, treaties, conventions, or similar instruments (external):
- a) internal constraint: a constraint which forms part of the commitment(s) mutually agreed to among
the parties to a business transaction
- b) external constraint: a constraint which takes precedence over internal constraints in a business
transaction, i.e., is external to those agreed upon by the parties to a business transaction
Open-edi further divides the category of external constraints into (1) those that are common and
horizontal in nature as introduced by the additional presence in a business transaction of a “regulator”
as a third sub-type of Person representing “public administration”, and (2) those that are more sectorial
in nature (involving standard rules, both across many sectors and across just one sector). Open-edi
differentiates these classes of constraints in order to provide summaries of complex bundles of rules for
scenario registration. For example, the simplest constraint bundle for a scenario could aggregate only
internal constraints; the next most complex could add horizontal external constraints, etc.
In the OeBTO, constraints encapsulating business rules constitute the third major representation
component. The first component was the declarative specification of domain classes and associations in
Clause 5, while the second component was the procedural aspects associated with business transaction
state machines and activity graphs as explained in Clause 6.

### 7.2	 OeBTO constraint examples

Constraints may be expressed informally in natural language, such as the following accounting rule for
separation of duties as applied to the class diagram of Figure 9:
“the Person who fills the participation role in an economic event that involves a certain economic
resource should not be the same Person who has a custody relationship with that economic resource”
The need for this constraint to a business transaction could be derived for example from the widelyused internal control separation of duties constraint common to most accounting applications.
Constraints may also be expressed more formally with the Object Constraint Language (OCL) of the UML.
For example, a state sales tax rule for Michigan (another sectorial external constraint) on merchandise
orders (a subtype of economic contract) could be specified as 6% of the gross amount of the order:
`context Order inv michiganSalesTaxCalculation`
salesTax = grossAmount × .06
Such a constraint could be placed in curly brackets on a UML class diagram next to the class definition
for order (for example, a more specific form of Figure 18), and it then becomes an invariant (inv) or a
condition that must be true for all objects of that class.
According to both Odell (1998) and Eriksson and Penker (2000), constraints may be of two general
behavioral kinds:
- a) Those that define how knowledge in one form may be inferred or derived from another form.
Examples of this constraint category might be the Michigan sales tax calculation shown above.
Another example might be a constraint that designates a scheduled shipment as “hazardous” if
it exceeds a designated weight threshold of goods (economic resources) typed as “dangerous if
unpackaged” shown in an inheritance taxonomy that would give domain level expansion to the
three levels initially shown in Figure 7.
- b) Those that “constrain either the possible structure or the behavior of objects or processes, that
is, the way objects are related to each other or the way objects or process state changes may
occur.”(Eriksson and Penker 2000:154). An especially prominent illustration for the OeBTO of this
class of constraints are rules that define pre-conditions and post-conditions for the types of state
changes described in Clause 6. For example in Figure 29, the state machine diagram makes it clear
that for Economic Resource Type to achieve its “proposed” state, it has a pre-condition of being in
state “identified” and a post-condition of state “specified” and that these transitions are effected by
the business events shown. These same types of rules can be specified as constraints in OCL and
portrayed on UML class diagrams.
Both derivation business rules and constraint business rules are important to effective business
operation in collaboration space, so their characterization in the Open-edi Business Transaction
Ontology is an important third step in insuring interoperability and semantic integrity. To the extent
that the declarative and procedural components of an ontology are specified correctly, the parties to
a business transaction are given computable methods for ensuring compliance with both internal and
external rules of business behavior.

### 7.3	 Summary

There is certainly now a critical opportunity for developing coherence in worldwide standards for
business level definitions of economic phenomena. Open-edi, especially in its prior work of ISO/IEC 159441, has standardized much of the technical and economic environment for economic exchanges, and the
field of ontology provides an extended opportunity for unifying and coordinating that work. This part of
ISO/IEC 15944 aims to provide that unity with an ontological analysis of the declarative, procedural, and
constraint components of Open-edi. Certainly, the majority of the work in this document concentrates
on the declarative components of the OeBTO – those data classes that model the fundamental categories
of economic endeavors in collaboration space and the relationships that exist among those categories.

This declarative emphasis is reasoned and deliberate. As noted by John Sowa (1984:24), conceptual
progress in a specialized domain is usually marked by an increasing percentage of the knowledge in
that field being embedded in its declarative components. As ad hoc procedures and constraints become
more structured and predictable, they lead naturally to better theoretical and conceptual structures.
In concert, the declarative, procedural, and constraint components of the Open-edi ontology provide a
definitive specification that is formal, explicit, and conceptual. An ontological foundation is one of the
key components of that coherence.

## Annex A (normative)

**Consolidated list of terms and definitions with cultural adaptability: ISO English and ISO French language equivalency**

### A.1	 Introduction

Users of this part of ISO/IEC 15944 may not have ready access to all standards referenced in either the
ISO English language version or the ISO French language equivalent where available.
This part of ISO/IEC  15944 maximizes the use of existing standards where and whenever possible
including relevant and applicable existing terms and definitions. This annex contains the consolidated
list of the ISO English and ISO French language paired terms and definitions used in this part of
ISO/IEC 15944 including those terms and definitions introduced in this part of ISO/IEC 15944. The
source is Clause 3, Terms and Definitions.
This annex is based on the approach taken for this multipart standard established in Annex  A of
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011.

### A.2	 ISO English and ISO French

This part of ISO/IEC 15944 recognizes that the use of English and French as natural languages is not
uniform or harmonized globally. (Other examples include use of Arabic, German, Portuguese, Russian,
Spanish, etc., as natural languages in various jurisdictions).
Consequently, the terms “ISO English” and “ISO French” are utilized here to indicate the ISO’s specialized
use of English and French as natural languages in the specific context of international standardization,
i.e., as a “special language”.

### A.3	 Cultural adaptability and quality control

ISO/IEC  JTC1 has added “cultural adaptability” as the third strategic direction which all standards
development work should support. The two other existing strategic directions are “portability” and
“interoperability”. Not all ISO/IEC JTC1 standards are being provided in more than one language, i.e., in
addition to “ISO/IEC English”, in part due to resource constraints.
Terms and definitions are an essential part of a standard. This Annex serves to support the “cultural
adaptability” aspects of standards as required by ISO/IEC JTC1. Its purpose is to ensure that if, for
whatever reason, an ISO/IEC JTC1 standard is developed in one ISO/IEC “official” language only, at the
minimum the terms and definitions are made available in more than one language.16) A key benefit of
translation of terms and definitions is that such work at providing bilingual/multilingual equivalency:
- should be considered a “quality control check” in that establishing an equivalency in another
language ferrets out “hidden” ambiguities in the source language. Often it is only in the translation
that ambiguities in the meaning, i.e., semantics, of the term/definition are discovered. Ensuring
bilingual/multilingual equivalency of terms/definition should thus be considered akin to a minimum
“ISO 9000-like” quality control check; and,
Other ISO/IEC member bodies are encouraged to provide bilingual/multilingual equivalencies of
terms/definitions for the language(s) in use in their countries.

- is considered a key element in the widespread adoption and use of standards world-wide (especially
by users of this standard who include those in various industry sectors, within a legal perspective,
policy makers and consumer representatives, other standards developers, IT hardware and service
providers, etc.).

### A.4	 List of terms in French alphabetical order

Generally, within a standard, the Clause 3 terms and definitions are presented in alphabetical order
and assigned Clause 3.nn ID numbers accordingly. The Consolidated Matrix of terms and definitions
presented below does the same.
In order to facilitate the identification of the terms in the French language the following list presents
them in French alphabetical order along with their English language equivalents in a table of three
column where,
- Column 1 = the number assigned to the term/definition pair in Clause 3
- Column 2 = the Term - French
- Column 3 = the Term – English
Clause 3
Number
Term — French
Term — English
**3.19**
accord économique
economic agreement
**3.11**
acheteur
buyer
**3.54**
administration publique
public administration
**3.4**
affaires
business
**3.2**
attribut
attribute
**3.57**
autorité de réglementation
regulator
**3.62**
Composant sémantique (SC)
Semantic Component (SC)
**3.14**
contrainte
constraint
**3.33**
contrainte externe
external constraint
**3.38**
contrainte interne
internal constraint
**3.23**
contrat économique
economic contract
**3.24**
contrôle économique
economic control
**3.16**
donnée
data
**3.18**
dualité
duality
**3.27**
échange économique
economic exchange
**3.43**
EDI-ouvert
Open-edi
**3.6**
emplacement d’affaires
business location
**3.13**
engagement
commitment
**3.22**
engagement économique
economic commitment
**3.32**
entité
entity
**3.9**
entité de transaction d’affaires
business transaction entity
**3.12**
espace de collaboration
collaboration space

Clause 3
Number
Term — French
Term — English
**3.5**
évènement d’affaires
business event
**3.25**
évènement économique
economic event
**3.34**
exécution
fulfillment
**3.37**
faisceau d’informations (IB)
information bundle (IB)
**3.20**
faisceau économique
economic bundle
**3.58**
flux des ressources
resource-flow
**3.15**
garde
custody
**3.36**
individu
individual
**3.56**
information enregistrée
recorded information
**3.1**
mandataire
agent
**3.40**
matérialisé
materialized
**3.17**
modèle de marché défini
defined market model
**3.67**
modèle de marché indéfini
undefined market model
**3.42**
objet
object
**3.44**
Ontologie de transaction d’affaires de
l’EDI ouvert
Open-edi Business Transaction Ontology
(OeBTO)
**3.47**
organisation
organization
**3.51**
partenaire
partner
**3.45**
Partenaire d’EDI-ouvert (OeP, Open-edi
Party)
Open-edi Party (OeP)
**3.50**
participe
participates
**3.48**
partie d’organisation
organization part
**3.52**
Personne
Person
**3.49**
Personne d’organisation
organization Person
**3.53**
processus
process
**3.55**
réciproque
reciprocal
**3.21**
réclamation économique
economic claim
**3.35**
régi
governed
**3.63**
règlement
settlement
**3.59**
responsabilité
responsibility
**3.28**
ressource économique
economic resource
**3.60**
rôle
role
**3.30**
rôle économique
economic role
**3.46**
scénario d’EDI-ouvert (OeS)
Open-edi scenario (OeS)
**3.64**
site
site
**3.31**
spécification économique
economic specification
**3.65**
tierce partie
third party
**3.41**
transaction arbitrée
mediated transaction
**3.3**
transaction bilatérale
bilateral transaction

Clause 3
Number
Term — French
Term — English
**3.8**
transaction d’affaires
business transaction
**3.39**
type d’emplacement
location type
**3.10**
type d’entité de transaction d’affaires
business transaction entity type
**3.26**
type d’évènement économique
economic event type
**3.29**
type de ressource économique
economic resource type
**3.66**
typification
typification
**3.61**
vendeur
seller
**3.7**
Vue opérationnelle des affaires (BOV)
Business Operational View (BOV)

### A.5 Organization of A.6, “Consolidated matrix of terms and definitions”

> **NOTE**
One should consider A.6:
—to be a matrix-based approach to the English and French language equivalents as found in any ISO or IEC
standard which is issued as an English/French side-by-side document (e.g. the multipart ISO/IEC 2382, Information
technology — Vocabulary/Technologies de l’information — Vocabulaire);
—an approach which is expandable for multilingual equivalency and human interface equivalency purposes; and,
—a necessary component in being able to reference any standard cited.
The terms/definitions are organized in matrix form in alphabetical order (English language). The
columns in the matrix are as follows:
Col. No.
Use
ID as per this part of ISO/IEC 15944 as stated in Clause 3, i.e. as the “nnn” in
“3.nnn”
The unique eBusiness Vocabulary identifier from ISO/IEC 15944-7.
Source. International Standard referenced or this part of ISO/IEC 15944.
ISO English Language - Term
Gender of the ISO English Language Terma
ISO English Language - Definition
ISO French Language - Termb
Gender of the French Language Terma
ISO French Language - Definitionb
a
The codes representing gender of terms in natural languages are those based on ISO/IEC 15944-5:2008, 6.2.6 titled
“Gender and Official Languages”. The codes used in Columns 4 and 7 are those based on the coded domain “15944-5:2008-01”,
titled “Codes representing Gender in Natural Languages”. As follows:
- for ISO English, in Column 4, the gender code is “99” ( = Not Applicable) since the English language does not have gender
in its grammar; and
- for ISO French, in Column 7, the possible gender codes are “01” = masculine/masculine, “02” = feminine/féminine; or,
“03” = neuter/neutre.
b
This indicates that the International Standard referenced (other than this part of ISO/IEC 15944) in Columns 6 and 8
does not have an ISO French language version. For these terms and definitions, this part of ISO/IEC 15944 is providing the
ISO French language equivalent.

The primary reason for organizing the columns in this order is to facilitate the addition of equivalent
terms/definitions in other languages as added sets of paired columns, (e.g., Spanish, Japanese, German,
Russian, etc.).

### A.6 Consolidated matrix of ISO/IEC 15944-4 terms and definitions in ISO English

and ISO French

Table A.6 — Consolidated matrix of ISO/IEC 15944-4 terms and definitions in ISO English and ISO French
**3.1**
D005
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.1
agent
Person acting for another Person in a
clearly specified capacity in the context of a
business transaction
mandataire
Personne agissant au nom d’une autre Personne
à titre précis dans le contexte d’une transaction
d’affaires

> **NOTE**
Excluded here are agents as
“automatons” (or robots, bobots, etc.). In
ISO/IEC 14662, “automatons” are recognized and provided for but as part of the
Functional Service View (FSV) where they
are defined as an “Information Processing
Domain (IPD)”.

> **NOTE**
Sont exclus les mandataires tels que les
«automates» (ou les robots, bobots, etc.). Dans
l’ISO/CEI 14662, les «automates» sont pris en
compte et prévus, mais à titre de vue de services
fonctionnels (FSV), où ils sont définis comme
«domaine de traitement de l’information (IPD)».
**3.2**
D009
ISO/IEC 11179-3:2003, 3.1.3
attribute
characteristic of an object or entity
attribute*
caractéristique d’un objet ou d’une entité
**3.3**
D012
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.3
bilateral
transaction
sub-type of a business transaction where
the Persons include only the buyer and the
seller, or alternatively other Persons acting
as agents for the buyer or seller
transaction
bilatérale
sous-type de transaction d’affaires dans lequel les
Personnes n’incluent que l’acheteur et le vendeur,
ou alternativement d’autres Personnes à titre
d’agents de l’acheteur et/ou du vendeur
**3.4**
D014
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.2
business
series of processes, each having a clearly
understood purpose, involving more than
one Person, realized through the exchange
of recorded information and directed
towards some mutually agreed upon goal,
extending over a period of time
affaires
série de processus, ayant chacun une finalité
clairement définie, impliquant plus d’une Personne, réalisés par échange d’information enregistrée et tendant à l’accomplissement d’un objectif
accepté par accord mutuel pour une certaine
période de temps
**3.5**
D015
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.5
business
event
an occurrence in time that partners to a
business transaction wish to monitor or
control
événement
d’affaires
circonstance temporelle que des partenaires dans
une transaction d’affaires souhaitent surveiller ou
contrôler

> **NOTE** 1
Business events are the workflow
tasks that business partners need to accomplish to complete a business transaction
among themselves. As business events occur,
they cause a business transaction to move
through its various phases of planning,
identification, negotiation, actualization,
and post-actualization.

> **NOTE** 1
Les événements d’affaires sont les tâches
de flux des travaux que les partenaires d’affaires
doivent accomplir pour conclure une transaction d’affaires entre eux. Lorsque des événements
d’affaires se produisent, ils obligent une transaction d’affaires à passer par les différentes étapes
de planification, d’identification, de négociation,
d’actualisation et de post-actualisation.

> **NOTE** 2
Occurrences in time can either be:
(a) internal as mutually agreed to among the
parties to a business transaction; and/or,
(b) reference some common publicly available and recognized date/time referencing
schema (e.g. one based on using ISO 8601
and/or ISO 19135 standards).

> **NOTE** 2
Les circonstances temporelles peuvent
être: (a) internes, par accord mutuel entre les parties d’une transaction d’affaires; et/ou, (b) une référence à un schéma de référencement horodateur
communément reconnu et publiquement disponible
(par exemple une basée sur l’utilisation des normes
l’ISO 8601 et/ou de l’ISO 19135).
**3.6**
D016
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.6
business
location
geographic site where an economic event is
deemed to occur with its attendant transfer
of an economic resource from one Person
to another.
emplacement
d’affaires
lieu géographique où un événement économique
est réputé se produire avec le transfert en attente
d’une ressource économique d’une Personne à
une autre
**3.7**
D021
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.3
Business
Operational
View (BOV)
perspective of business transactions limited to those aspects regarding the making
of business decisions and commitments
among Persons, which are needed for the
description of a business transaction
Vue opérationnelle
des affaires
(BOV)
vue perspective sur les transactions d’affaires,
restreinte à ceux des aspects relatifs à la prise par
les Personnes de décisions et d’engagements
concernant leurs affaires qui sont nécessaires pour
décrire une transaction d’affaires
**3.8**
D022
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.4
business
transaction
predefined set of activities and/or processes of Persons which is initiated by a
Person to accomplish an explicitly shared
business goal and terminated upon recognition of one of the agreed conclusions by all
the involved Persons although some of the
recognition may be implicit
transaction
d’affaires
ensemble prédéterminé d’activités et/ou de
processus menées par des Personnes et/ou de
procédures qu’elles suivent, déclenché par une
Personne qui vise à atteindre dans les affaires
un but expressément partagé, terminé lorsqu’est
observée une des conclusions convenues par toutes
les Personnes prenantes, bien que cette observation puisse être partiellement implicite
**3.9**
D023
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.9
business
transaction
entity
computable representation of any real‑world
entity that participates, occurs or is materialized during a business transaction
entité de
transaction
d’affaires
représentation calculable de toute entité du monde
réel qui participe à une transaction d’affaires, se
produit ou est matérialisée durant celle-ci
**3.10**
D024
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.10
business
transaction
entity type
abstract specification of a business transaction entity, detailing its recommended
characteristics, its recommended methods
and its recommended life-cycle states
type d’entité
de transaction d’affaires
spécification abstraite d’une entité de transaction
d’affaires détaillant ses caractéristiques recommandées, ses méthodes recommandées et ses états
de cycle de vie recommandés

> **NOTE**
A business transaction entity type
will usually specify the types of business
events that cause a business transaction
entity of this type to proceed through its
different states as the business transaction
itself progresses through its phases of planning, identification, negotiation, actualization and post-actualization.

> **NOTE**
Un type d’entité de transaction d’affaires
spécifie généralement les types de transaction
d’affaires qui amènent une entité de transaction
d’affaires de ce type à passer par ses différents
états au fur et à mesure que la transaction d’affaires
elle-même progresse dans ses phases de planification, d’identification, de négociation, d’actualisation
et de post-actualisation.
**3.11**
D026
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.8
buyer
Person who aims to get possession of a
good, service and/or right through providing an acceptable equivalent value, usually
in money, to the Person providing such a
good, service and/or right
acheteur
Personne désirant acquérir un bien, service et/ou
droit en fournissant une valeur équivalente acceptable, généralement de l’argent, à la Personne qui
offre ce bien, service et/ou droit
**3.12**
D038
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.12
collaboration space
business activity space where an economic
exchange of valued resources is viewed
independently and not from the perspective
of any business partner
espace de collaboration
espace d’activité d’affaires dans lequel un échange
économique de ressources valorisées est considéré
indépendamment et non du point de vue de tout
partenaire d’affaires

> **NOTE**
In collaboration space, an individual partner’s view of economic phenomena is
de-emphasized. Thus, the common use business and accounting terms like purchase,
sale, cash receipt, cash disbursement, raw
materials and finished goods. etc., is not
allowed because they view resource flows
from a participant’s perspective.

> **NOTE**
Dans l’espace de collaboration, la
perspective qu’un partenaire individuel a d’un
phénomène économique est désaccentuée. Ainsi,
les termes d’affaires et de comptabilité communément utilisés tels qu’achat, vente, reçu de caisse,
décaissement, matières premières, produits finis,
etc. ne sont pas autorisés à être utilisés car ils considèrent les flux de ressources du point de vue d’un
participant.
**3.13**
D039
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.9
commitment
making or accepting of a right, obligation,
liability or responsibility by a Person that
is capable of enforcement in the jurisdictional domain in which the commitment is
made
engagement
création ou acceptation d’un droit, d’une obligation, d’une dette ou d’une responsabilité par une
Personne qui est apte à appliquer le domaine juridictionnel conformément à laquelle l’engagement est
pris
**3.14**
D048
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.11
constraint
rule, explicitly stated, that prescribes, limits,
governs or specifies any aspect of a business transaction.
contrainte
règle, énoncée explicitement, qui prescrit, limite,
régit ou spécifie tout aspect d’une transaction
d’affaires.

> **NOTE** 1
Constraints are specified as rules
forming part of components of Open-edi
scenarios, i.e. as scenario attributes, roles
and/or information bundles.

> **NOTE** 1
Les contraintes sont spécifiées comme
des règles faisant partie de composantes de scénarios d’EDI-ouvert, c.-à-d. d’attributs de scénarios,
de rôles, et/ou de faisceaux d’information.

> **NOTE** 2
For constraints to be registered
for implementation in Open-edi, they must
have unique and unambiguous identifiers.

> **NOTE** 2
Les contraintes doivent avoir des
identificateurs uniques et non ambigus afin d’être
enregistrées pour application dans l’EDI-ouvert.

> **NOTE** 3
A constraint may be agreed
to among parties (condition of contract)
and is therefore considered an “internal
constraint”. Or a constraint may be imposed
on parties (e.g. laws, regulations, etc.), and
is therefore considered an “external constraint”.

> **NOTE** 3
Une contrainte peut faire l’objet d’un
accord entre des parties (clause du contrat), et est
par conséquent considérée comme «contrainte
interne». Une contrainte peut aussi être imposée à
des parties (par exemple des lois, des règlements,
etc.), et est par conséquent considérée comme une
«contrainte externe».
**3.15**
D058
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.15
custody
association between a Person and an
economic resource where the Person has
physical control only over the resource or
controls access
garde
association entre une Personne et une ressource
économique dans laquelle la Personne exerce un
contrôle physique uniquement sur la ressource ou
en contrôle l’accès

> **NOTE**
Having custody of a good, service
and/or right does not imply and is differentiated from having economic control of
the same (e.g. a Person may have economic
control of a good even though it is not under
its custody.

> **NOTE**
Avoir la garde d’un produit, d’un service
et/ou d’un droit n’implique pas, et est différencié,
d’exercer un contrôle économique sur celui-ci (par
exemple, une Personne peut exercer un contrôle
économique sur un bien même si celui-ci n’est pas
sous sa garde).
**3.16**
D060
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.14
data (in a
business
transaction)
representations of recorded information that are being prepared or have been
prepared in a form suitable for use in a
computer system.
donnée
(dans une
transaction
d’affaires)
représentations d’informations enregistrées qui
sont préparées ou l’ont été de façon à pouvoir être
traitée par un ordinateur
**3.17**
D069
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.17
defined
market
model
trade model where the buyer and seller
accept the entry terms of a specified market
in advance and where that market has an
accepted and recognized source for business rules and conventions
modèle de
marché défini
modèle de marché dans lequel l’acheteur et le
vendeur acceptent d’avance les termes d’un marché
spécifié et dans lequel ce marché est couvert par
des règles et des conventions d’affaires acceptées
et reconnues

> **NOTE**
In a defined market, the phases of
a business transaction – planning, identification, negotiation, actualization and postactualization – are governed by the rules
and conventions of the particular defined
market.

> **NOTE**
Dans un marché défini, les phases
d’une transaction d’affaires c.à d.la planification,
l’identification, la négociation, l’actualisation et la
post-actualisation, sont régies par les règles et les
conventions de ce marché défini particulier.
**3.18**
D075
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.18
duality
association between economic events
where one is the legal or economic consideration for the other in an exchange
dualité
association entre des événements économiques
dans laquelle l’une est la considération légale ou
économique de l’autre au cours d’un échange

> **NOTE**
Duality is the conceptual analog of
double entry in traditional bookkeeping. For
example, a shipment from a partner requires
a matching flow in, like a payment, to balance accounts between the parties.

> **NOTE**
La dualité est l’équivalent conceptuel
d’une double entrée en tenue de comptabilité
traditionnelle. Par exemple une expédition par un
partenaire exige un flux correspondant tel qu’un
versement pour solder les comptes entre les parties.
**3.19**
D077
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.19
economic
agreement
arrangement of reciprocated economic
commitments between two partners
where the abstract specification of terms of
trade is incomplete and not subject to legal
enforcement
accord
économique
accord d’engagement économique réciproque
entre deux partenaires dans lequel la spécification
abstraite des termes de l’échange est incomplète et
non sujette à une exécution légale
**3.20**
D078
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.20
economic
bundle
association between economic commitments and the economic contract that
bundles those promises and binds them to
the two partners who negotiated them
faisceau
économique
association entre des engagements économiques et le contrat économique qui groupe ces
promesses et les lie aux deux partenaires qui les
ont négociées
**3.21**
D079
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.21
economic
claim
expectation of one Person to receive a
future inflow of economic resources from
another Person because of an economic
exchange which is currently incomplete
réclamation
économique
attente qu’a une Personne de recevoir un futur flux
de ressources économiques d’une autre Personne
pour cause d’échange économique encore incomplet
**3.22**
D080
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.22
economic
commitment
type of commitment by one Person to
transfer economic resources to another
Person at some specified point in the future
engagement
économique
type d’engagement par une Personne à transférer
des ressources économiques à une autre Personne à un moment donné dans le futur
**3.23**
D081
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.23
economic
contract
bundling of reciprocated economic commitments between two partners where the
abstract specification of the proposed economic exhange is deemed to be complete
contrat
économique
groupement d’engagements économiques
réciproques entre deux partenaires dans lequel la
spécification abstraite de l’échange économique
proposé est jugée complète

**3.24**
D082
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.24
economic
control
association between a Person and an economic resource where the Person either
owns the resource or is otherwise able to
derive economic benefit (utility) from it
contrôle
économique
association entre une Personne et une ressource
économique dans laquelle la Personne est propriétaire de la ressource ou est en mesure d’en
retirer un avantage (ou une utilité) économique
**3.25**
D083
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.25
economic
event
occurrence in time wherein ownership of an
economic resource is transferred from one
Person to another Person
événement
économique
circonstance temporelle dans laquelle la propriété
d’une ressource économique est transférée d’une
Personne à une autre Personne

> **NOTE**
Occurrences in time can either:
(a) be internal as mutually agreed to among
the parties to a business transaction; and/or,
(b) reference some common publicly available and recognized date/time referencing
schema (e.g. one based on using ISO 8601
and/or ISO 19135 standards).

> **NOTE**
Les circonstances temporelles peuvent
être: (a) internes, par accord mutuel entre les parties d’une transaction d’affaires, et/ou (b) une référence à un schéma de référencement horodateur
communément reconnu et publiquement disponible
(par exemple une basée sur l’utilisation des normes
l’ISO 8601 et/ou de l’ISO 19135).
**3.26**
D084
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.26
economic
event type
abstract specification of an economic
event where its grouped properties can be
designated without attachment to an actual,
specific occurrence in time
type
d’événement
économique
spécification abstraite d’un événement économique dans laquelle ses propriétés groupées peuvent
être désignées sans rattachement à un réel événement temporel spécifique

> **NOTE**
Examples of attributes at the type
level for events might be expected-duration
or standard-pricing-percentage.

> **NOTE**
La durée prévue ou le pourcentage de tarification normalisée sont des exemples d’attributs
au niveau du type d’événements.
**3.27**
D085
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.27
economic
exchange
type of a business transaction where the
goal is an exchange of economic resources
between two Persons where both parties
derive higher utility after the completed
business transaction
échange
économique
type de transaction d’affaires dans lequel
l’objectif est un échange de ressources économiques entre deux Personnes qui en obtiennent
une plus grande utilité une fois la transaction
d’affaires achevée

> **NOTE**
An economic exchange usually
involves two economic events with different types of economic resources flowing
in opposite directions. For example, an
exchange of cash for a good involves a shipment with a requited payment following.

> **NOTE**
Un échange économique implique généralement deux événements économiques au cours
desquels les ressources s’écoulent dans des directions opposées. Par exemple un échange d’espèces
contre un bien implique une expédition accompagnée d’une opération avec contrepartie.
**3.28**
D086
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.28
economic
resource
good, right or service of value, under the
control of a Person
ressource
économique
produit, droit ou service de valeur, sous le contrôle
d’une Personne

**3.29**
D087
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.29
economic
resource
type
abstract specification of an economic
resource where its grouped properties can
be designated without attachment to an
actual, specific economic resource
type de
ressource
économique
spécification abstraite d’une ressource économique dans laquelle ses propriétés groupées peuvent
être désignées sans rattachement à une réelle ressource économique spécifique

> **NOTE**
Example of attributes at the
type level for an economic resource like an
automobile might include its designated fuel
capacity or its maximum expected range.

> **NOTE**
La capacité du réservoir de carburant
d’une automobile ou son autonomie sont un exemple d’attributs au niveau du type d’une ressource
économique.
**3.30**
D088
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.30
economic
role
abstract specification of a Person for economic purposes where its grouped properties can be designated without attachment
to an actual Person
rôle économique
spécification abstraite d’une Personne à des fins
économiques dans laquelle ses propriétés groupées
peuvent être désignées sans rattachement à une
Personne réelle

> **EXAMPLE** Economic role might be qualified
buyer or approved shipper.

EXEMPLE D’un point de vue économique uniquement., un acheteur qualifié ou un expéditeur
approuvé.
**3.31**
D089
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.31
economic
specification
association between an economic commitment and the abstract properties of an
economic event, an economic resource, a
partner or a business location
spécification
économique
association entre un engagement économique
et les propriétés abstraites d’un événement
économique, d’une ressource économique, d’un
partenaire ou d’un emplacement d’affaires
**3.32**
D093
ISO/IEC 2382-17:1999, 17.02.05
entity
concrete or abstract thing that exists, did
exist or might exist, including associations
among these things
entité
objet ou association d’objets, concret ou abstrait,
existant, ayant existé ou pouvant exister

EXAMPLE
A person, object, event,
idea, process, etc.

EXEMPLE	Personne, événement, idée, processus,
etc.

> **NOTE**
An entity exists whether data
about it are available or not.

> **NOTE**
Une entité existe que l’on dispose de données à son sujet ou non.
**3.33**
D098
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.23
external
constraint
constraint which takes precedence over
internal constraints in a business transaction, i.e. is external to those agreed upon
by the parties to a business transaction
contrainte
externe
contrainte qui l’emporte sur les contraintes
internes dans une transaction d’affaires, c.-à-d.
qui est externe à celles convenues entre les parties
dans une transaction d’affaires

> **NOTE** 1
Normally external constraints are
created by law, regulation, orders, treaties,
conventions or similar instruments.

> **NOTE** 1
Normalement, les contraintes externes
découlent des lois, règlements, décrets, traités,
conventions ou autres instruments semblables.

> **NOTE** 2
Other sources of external constraints are those of a sectorial nature, those
which pertain to a particular jurisdiction or
mutually agreed to common business conventions (e.g. INCOTERMS, exchanges, etc.).

> **NOTE** 2
D’autres sources de contraintes externes
sont de nature sectorielle, qui relèvent d’un
domaine juridictionnel particulier ou de conventions d’affaires convenues mutuellement, (par
exemple INCOTERMS, les échanges, etc.).

> **NOTE** 3
External constraints can apply to
the nature of the good, service and/or right
provided in a business transaction.

> **NOTE** 3
Des contraintes externes peuvent
s’exercer sur la nature des biens, des services, et/ou
au droit accordé dans une transaction d’affaires.

> **NOTE** 4
External constraints can demand
that a party to a business transaction meet
specific requirements of a particular role.

> **NOTE** 4
Des contraintes externes peuvent exiger
qu’une partie dans une transaction d’affaires
réponde aux exigences spécifiques d’un rôle.

> **EXAMPLE** 1
Only a qualified medical
doctor may issue a prescription for a controlled drug.

EXEMPLE 1
Seul un médecin diplômé peut
prescrire une ordonnance pour un médicament
contrôlé.

> **EXAMPLE** 2
Only an accredited share
dealer may place transactions on the New
York Stock Exchange.

EXEMPLE 2
Seul un courtier en actions
accrédité peut effectuer des transactions à la
bourse de New‑York.

> **EXAMPLE** 3
Hazardous wastes may
only be conveyed by a licenced enterprise.

EXEMPLE 3
Seule une entreprise attitrée
peut transporter des déchets dangereux.

> **NOTE** 5
Where the Information Bundles
(IBs), including their Semantic Components
(SCs), of a business transaction are also to
form the whole of a business transaction
(e.g. for legal or audit purposes), all constraints must be recorded.

> **NOTE** 5
Lorsque les Faisceaux d’information, y
compris leurs composantes sémantiques, d’une
transaction d’affaires constituent l’ensemble d’une
transaction d’affaires (par exemple à des fins
juridiques ou comptables), toutes les contraintes
doivent être enregistrées.

EXAMPLE
There may be a legal or
audit requirement to maintain the complete
set of recorded information pertaining to a
business transaction, i.e., as the Information
Bundles exchanged, as a “record”.

EXEMPLE	Il peut exister une exigence juridique ou
comptable de conserver la totalité des documents
enregistrés relatifs à une transaction d’affaires, c.-
à-d. les Faisceaux d’information échangés, comme
un «enregistrement».

> **NOTE** 6
A minimum external constraint
applicable to a business transaction often
requires one to differentiate whether the
Person, i.e. that is a party to a business
transaction, is an “individual”, “organization”, or “public administration”. For example, privacy rights apply only to a Person as
an “individual”.

> **NOTE** 6
Une contrainte externe minimale applicable à une transaction d’affaires exige souvent de
distinguer si une Personne, c.-à-d. une partie dans
une transaction d’affaires, est un «individu», une
«organisation» ou une «administration publique».
Par exemple, les droits de protection de la vie
privée ne s’appliquent qu’à une Personne en tant qu’
«individu».
**3.34**
D100
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.34
fulfillment
association between an economic commitment and an economic event where the
event executes the promised resource flow
from one Person to another
exécution
association entre un engagement économique
et un événement économique dans laquelle
l’événement exécute le flux de la ressource promise
d’une Personne à une autre

> **EXAMPLE** A delivery to a customer would
fulfill that customer’s sale order.

EXEMPLE La livraison à un client exécute la commande de celui-ci.
**3.35**
D104
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.35
governed
association between an economic agreement and the business transaction whose
conduct and phases are subject to that
economic agreement of the business
transaction
régi
association entre un accord économique et la
transaction d’affaires dont la conduite et les
phases sont sujettes à cet accord économique
d’une transaction d’affaires
**3.36**
D113
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.28
individual
Person who is a human being, i.e. a natural
person, who acts as a distinct indivisible
entity or is considered as such
individu
Personne qui est un être humain, c-à-d. une personne physique, qui agit à titre d’entité indivisible
distincte ou qui est considérée comme telle
**3.37**
D116
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.11
Information Bundle
(IB)
formal description of the semantics of the
recorded information to be exchanged by
Open-edi Parties playing roles in an Openedi scenario
Faisceau
d’informations
(IB)
description formelle de la valeur sémantique des
informations enregistrées échangées entre
partenaires d’EDI-ouvert jouant un rôle dans un
scénario d’EDI-ouvert
**3.38**
D119
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.33
internal
constraint
constraint which forms part of the
commitment(s) mutually agreed to among
the parties to a business transaction
contrainte
interne
contrainte qui fait partie de l’engagement convenu
mutuellement entre les parties d’une transaction
d’affaires

> **NOTE**
Internal constraints are selfimposed. They provide a simplified view for
modeling and re-use of scenario components
of a business transaction for which there
are no external constraints or restrictions
on the nature of the conduct of a business
transaction other than those mutually
agreed to by the buyer and seller.

> **NOTE**
Les contraintes internes sont volontaires.
Elles présentent une vue simplifiée de modélisation
et de réutilisation des composantes de scénario
d’une transaction d’affaires sans contraintes ou
restrictions externes quant à la conduite d’une
transaction d’affaires autres que celles convenues
mutuellement entre l’acheteur et le vendeur.

**3.39**
D139
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.39
location
type
abstract specification of a business location
where its grouped properties can be designated without attachment to an actual place
type
d’emplacement
spécification abstraite d’un emplacement
d’affaires dans laquelle ses propriétés groupées
peuvent être désignées sans rattachement à un
emplacement réel

> **EXAMPLE** A location type might be an
accepted shipping facility or approved hospital location

EXEMPLE Une installation d’expédition acceptée ou
un emplacement d’hôpital approuvé.
**3.40**
D135
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.40
materialized
association between an economic event and
an economic claim where the occurrence of
the economic event causes the economic
claim to come into existence
matérialisé
association entre un événement économique et
une réclamation économique dans laquelle la
production d’un événement économique amène la
réclamation économique à exister
**3.41**
D136
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.41
mediated
transaction
sub-type of a business transaction where a
third party mediates between the partners
as mutually agreed to by the partners
transaction
arbitrée
sous-type de transaction d’affaires dans laquelle
une tierce partie arbitre entre les partenaires
selon un accord mutuel entre les partenaires
**3.42**
D146
ISO/IEC 1087-1:2000, 3.1.1
object
anything perceivable or conceivable
objet
tout ce qui peut être perçu ou conçu

> **NOTE**
Objects may be material (e.g. an
engine, a sheet of paper, a diamond), immaterial (e.g. a conversion ratio, a project plan)
or imagined (e.g. a unicorn).

> **NOTE**
Les objets peuvent être matériels (par
exemple un moteur, une feuille de papier, un
diamant), immatériels (par exemple un rapport de
conversion, un plan de projet) ou imaginaires (par
exemple une licorne).
**3.43**
D155
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.14
Open-edi
electronic data interchange among multiple autonomous Persons to accomplish an
explicit shared business goal according to
Open-edi standards
EDI-ouvert
échange de données informatisé par application des normes d’EDI-ouvert entre plusieurs
Personnes autonomes visant un objectif d’affaires
explicitement partagé
**3.44**
D156
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.44
Open-edi
Business
Transaction
Ontology
(OeBTO)
formal, rule-based specification and definition of the concepts pertaining to business
transactions and scenarios and the relationships that hold among these concepts
Ontologie de
transaction
d’affaires de
l’EDI ouvert
(OeBTO)
spécification et définition formelles, basé sur des
règles, des concepts relatifs aux transactions et
scénarios d’affaires, et rapports qui existent entre
ces concepts

**3.45**
D160
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.17
Open-edi
Party (OeP)
Person that participates in Open-edi.
> **NOTE** Often referred to generically in this,
and other eBusiness standards, (e.g., parts
of the ISO/IEC 15944 multipart eBusiness”
standard) as “party” or “parties” for any
entity modelled as a Person as playing a role
in Open-edi scenarios.
Partenaire
d’EDI-ouvert
(OeP, Openedi Party)
Personne participant à l’EDI-ouvert
> **NOTE** Souvent mentionnée de façon générique
dans la présente norme, et dans d’autres normes
d’eAffaires (par ex. dans certaines parties de la
norme multiparties d’ « eAffaires » ISO/CEI 15944),
comme « partie » ou « parties » pour toute entité
modélisée comme une Personne jouant un rôle dans
les scénarios d’EDI-ouvert.
**3.46**
D172
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.18
Open-edi
scenario
(OeS)
formal specification of a class of business
transactions having the same business
goal
scénario
d’EDI-ouvert
(OeS)
spécification formelle d’une classe de transactions
d’affaires partageant le même objectif d’affaires
**3.47**
D179
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.1
organization
unique framework of authority within which
a person or persons act, or are designated to
act, towards some purpose
organisation
cadre unique d’autorité dans lequel une ou plusieurs personnes agissent ou sont désignées pour
agir afin d’atteindre un certain but

> **NOTE**
The kinds of organizations covered by this part of ISO/IEC 15944 include
the following examples.

> **NOTE**
Les types d’organisations couverts par la
présente partie de l’ISO/CEI 15944 comprennent les
exemples suivants.

> **EXAMPLE** 1 An organization incorporated
under law.

EXEMPLE 1 Organisation constituée suivant des
formes juridiques prévues par la loi.

> **EXAMPLE** 2 An unincorporated organization or activity providing goods and/or
services including: (a) partnerships,, (b)
social or other non-profit organizations or
similar bodies in which ownership or
control is vested in a group of individuals, (c)
sole proprietorships,, or (d) governmental
bodies.

EXEMPLE 2 Organisation ou activités fournissant
des biens et/ou des services, tels que (a) sociétés en
participation, (b) organismes sociaux ou autres à
but non lucratif dans lesquels le droit de propriété
ou le contrôle est dévolu à un groupe de personnes,
(c) entreprises individuelles, et (d) administrations
et organismes de l’état.

> **EXAMPLE** 3 Groupings of the above types of
organizations where there is a need to identify these in information interchange.

EXEMPLE 3 Regroupements des organisations des
types ci-dessus, lorsqu’il est nécessaire de les identifier pour l’échange d’informations.
**3.48**
D182
ISO/IEC 6523-1:1998, 3.2
organization part
department, service or other entity within
an organization, which needs to be identified for information interchange
partie
d’organisation*
département, service ou autre entité au sein d’une
organisation, qu’il est nécessaire d’identifier pour
l’échange d’informations

**3.49**
D183
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.46
organization Person
organization part which has the properties
of a Person and thus is able to make commitments on behalf of that organization
Personne
d’organisation
partie d’une organisation qui a les propriétés
d’une Personne et est ainsi capable de prendre des
engagements au nom de cette organisation

> **NOTE** 1
An organization can have one or
more organization Persons.

> **NOTE** 1
Une organisation peut avoir une ou plusieurs Personnes d’organisation.

> **NOTE** 2
An organization Person is deemed
to represent and act on behalf of the organization and to do so in a specified capacity.

> **NOTE** 2
Une Personne d’organisation est considérée représenter une organisation et agir en son
nom, et ce à titre de capacité spécifiée.

> **NOTE** 3
An organization Person can be
a “natural person” such as an employee or
officer of the organization.

> **NOTE** 3
Une Personne d’organisation peut être
une «personne physique» telle qu’un employé ou un
agent de l’organisation.

> **NOTE** 4
An organization Person can be a
legal person, i.e. another organization.

> **NOTE** 4
Une Personne d’organisation peut être
une personne morale, c.à-d. une autre organisation.
**3.50**
D185
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.50
participates
association between an economic event and
each of the two Persons participating in the
economic event
participe
association entre un événement économique et
chacune des deux Personnes participant à un événement économique

> **NOTE**
Usually there is a “from” association and a “to” association, depending upon
the direction of the flow of the economic
resource.

> **NOTE**
En général, il y a une association «de» et
une association «à», selon la direction du flux de la
ressource économique.
**3.51**
D186
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.51
partner
sub-type of Person that includes buyer and
seller
partenaire
sous-type de Personne qui inclut l’acheteur et le
vendeur
**3.52**
D187
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.47
Person
entity, i.e. a natural or legal person,
recognized by law as having legal rights
and duties, able to make commitment(s),
assume and fulfil resulting obligation(s), and
able to be held accountable for its action(s)
Personne
entité, c-à-d. une personne physique ou morale,
reconnue par la loi comme ayant des droits et
des devoirs, capable de faire des engagements,
d’assumer et de remplir les obligations résultantes,
et capable d’être tenue responsable de ses actions

> **NOTE** 1
Synonyms for “legal person”
include “artificial person”, “body corporate”,
etc., depending on the terminology used in
competent jurisdictions.

> **NOTE** 1
Parmi les synonymes de «personne
morale», on trouve «personne juridique», «personne fictive», «corporation», etc., selon la terminologie utilisée par les juridictions compétentes.

> **NOTE** 2
Person is capitalized to indicate
that it is being utilized as formally defined in
the standards and to differentiate it from its
day-to-day use.

> **NOTE** 2
«Personne» prend la majuscule pour
indiquer que ce terme est utilisé tel que défini officiellement dans les normes et pour le différencier
de son usage ordinaire.

> **NOTE** 3
Minimum and common external
constraints applicable to a business transaction often require one to differentiate among
three common subtypes of Person, namely
“individual”, “organization”, and “public
administration”.

> **NOTE** 3
Les exigences minimales et communes
applicables aux transactions d’affaires obligent
souvent à faire une différence entre les trois souscatégories communes de «Personne», notamment
«individu», «organisation», «administration publique».
**3.53**
D202
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.53
process
series of actions or events taking place in a
defined manner leading to the accomplishment of an expected result
processus
série d’actions ou d’événements qui se produisent
d’une manière définie et qui aboutissent à un résultat attendu.
**3.54**
D204
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.54
public
administration
entity, i.e. a Person, which is an organization and has the added attribute of being
authorized to act on behalf of a regulator
administration publique
entité, c.-à-d. une Personne, qui est une organisation et a l’attribut supplémentaire d’être autorisé à
agir au nom d’une autorité de réglementation
**3.55**
D206
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.55
reciprocal
association between economic commitments where the promise by one partner
to execute an economic resource transfer
in the future is reciprocated by the other
partner promising a requited transfer in the
opposite direction
réciproque
association entre des engagements économiques dans laquelle la promesse d’un partenaire
d’exécuter un transfert de ressource économique
dans le futur est réciproquée par l’autre partenaire
qui promet un transfert avec contrepartie dans la
direction opposée
**3.56**
D209
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.56
recorded
information
information that is recorded on or in a
medium irrespective of form, recording
medium or technology utilized, and in a
manner allowing for storage and retrieval
information
enregistrée
information enregistrée sur ou dans un support
quelle que soit sa forme, le support de stockage ou
la technologie utilisés, et de façon à permettre son
stockage et son extraction

> **NOTE** 1
This is a generic definition and is
independent of any ontology (e.g. those of
“facts” versus “data” versus “information”
versus “intelligence” versus “knowledge”,
etc.).

> **NOTE** 1
Cette définition est générique et
indépendante de toute ontologie (par exemple le
point de vue des «faits» par rapport aux «données»,
à «l’information», aux «renseignements», à la «connaissance», etc.

> **NOTE** 2
Through the use of the term
“information,” all attributes of this term are
inherited in this definition.

> **NOTE** 2
Dans l’utilisation du terme «information»,
tous les attributs de ce terme sont hérités dans
cette définition.

> **NOTE** 3
This definition covers: (a) any
form of recorded information, means of
recording, and any medium on which information can be recorded; and, (b) all types
of recorded information including all data
types, instructions or software, databases,
etc.

> **NOTE** 3
Cette définition couvre les élément suivants: (a) toute forme d’information enregistrée,
tout moyen d’enregistrement, et tout support sur
lequel l’information peut être enregistrée; et, (b)
tous types d’information enregistrée, y compris
tous les types de données, instructions ou logiciels,
bases de données, etc.

**3.57**
D227
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.59
regulator
Person who has authority to prescribe
external constraints which serve as principles, policies or rules governing or prescribing the behaviour of Persons involved
in a business transaction as well as the
provisioning of goods, services and/or rights
interchanged
autorité de
réglementation
Personne autorisée à prescrire des contraintes
externes qui servent de principes, de politiques ou
de règles régissant ou prescrivant le comportement
des Personnes concernées par une transaction
d’affaire, ainsi que la fourniture des biens, services
et/ou droits échangés
**3.58**
D230
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.58
resourceflow
association between an economic event and
an economic resource
flux des ressources
association entre un événement économique et
une ressource économique

> **EXAMPLE** A resource-flow between some
inventory and the shipment that caused
control of that inventory to flow from one
Person to another.

EXEMPLE Le flux des ressources entre un inventaire et l’expédition qui a permis à cet inventaire de
fluer d’une Personne à une autre.
**3.59**
D231
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.59
responsibility
association between Persons where one
is responsible for the other or between a
Person and an organization Person where
that Person is assigned
responsabilité
association entre des Personnes dans laquelle l’une
est responsable devant l’autre, ou entre une Personne et une Personne d’organisation à laquelle
cette Personne est attitrée

> **NOTE**
Subtypes of Persons include individuals, organizations and public administrations. An “individual” is non-divisible but
organizations and public administrations
are and as such will assign specific responsibilities to organization Persons (see further
Clause 6.2.7 and Figure 17 in ISO/IEC 159441).

> **NOTE**
Les sous-types de Personnes incluent les
individus, les organisations et les administrations
publiques. Un «individu» est indivisible, mais les
organisations et les administrations publiques sont
divisibles et en tant que telles, peuvent attribuer
des responsabilités spécifiques à des Personnes
d’organisation (Voir plus loin 6.2.7 et la Figure 17
dans l’ISO/CEI 15944-1).
**3.60**
D233
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.25
role
specification which models an external
intended behaviour (as allowed within a
scenario) of an Open-edi Party
rôle
spécification qui modélise le comportement externe
attendu d’un partenaire d’EDI-ouvert dans le
cadre permis par un scénario
**3.61**
D243
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.62
seller
Person who aims to hand over voluntarily
or in response to a demand, a good, service
and/or right to another Person and in
return receives an acceptable equivalent
value, usually in money, for the good, service
and/or right provided
vendeur
Personne qui vise à fournir, volontairement ou
suite à une demande, un bien, un service et/ou un
droit à une autre Personne, et qui reçoit en retour
une valeur équivalente acceptable, habituellement
en argent
**3.62**
D244
ISO/IEC 14662:2010, 3.27
Semantic
Component
(SC)
unit of recorded information unambiguously defined in the context of the business
goal of the business transaction
composant
sémantique
(SC)
unité d’information enregistrée définie de
manière non ambigué dans le contexte de l’objectif
d’affaires d’une transaction d’affaires

> **NOTE**
An SC may be atomic or composed
of other SCs.

> **NOTE**
Un SC peut être atomique ou composé
d’autres SC.
**3.63**
D248
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.63
settlement
association between a requiting economic
event and an economic claim where the
occurrence of the event causes the economic claim to expire
règlement
association entre un événement économique avec
contrepartie et une réclamation économique dans
laquelle la production de l’évènement occasionne
l’expiration de la réclamation économique
**3.64**
D249
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.64
site
association between an economic event and
the business location where the transfer of
economic resources involved in that event
is deemed to have occurred
site
association entre un événement économique et
l’emplacement d’affaires où le transfert des ressources économiques dont il s’agit dans cet évènement est sensé s’être produit
**3.65**
D260
ISO/IEC 15944-1:2011, 3.65
third party
Person besides the two primarily concerned
in a business transaction who is agent of
neither and who fulfils a specified role or
function as mutually agreed to by the two
primary Persons or as a result of external
constraints
tierce partie
Personne, autre que les deux Personnes concernées en premier lieu par une transaction
d’affaires et qui n’est le mandataire d’aucune
d’elles, et qui joue un rôle ou remplit une fonction
spécifés, selon l’accord mutuel des deux Personnes concernées en premier lieu, ou le résultat de
contraintes externes

> **NOTE**
It is understood that more than
two Persons can at times be primary parties
in a business transaction.

> **NOTE**
Il est entendu que plus de deux Personnes
peuvent parfois être les parties de première part
dans une transaction d’affaires.
**3.66**
D265
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.66
typification 99
association between a concrete entity and
the abstract specification of its grouped
properties
typification
association entre une entité concrète et la spécification abstraite de ses propriétés groupées
**3.67**
D267
ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007, 3.67
undefined
market
model
trade model where participants are not
registered in advance and where that market does not have accepted and recognized
sources or business rules and conventions
modèle de
marché
indéfini
modèle d’échanges dans lequel les participants
ne sont pas enregistrés d’avance et dans lequel ce
marché n’a pas de sources acceptées et reconnues
concernant les règles et les conventions d’affaires

## Annex B (informative)

**REA Model Background**

### B.1	 REA (Resource-Event-Agent) ontology introduction17)

Ontology, according to the most generally accepted e-commerce definition of that word, is a “specification
of a conceptualization” (Gruber 1993). The REA (Resource-Event-Agent) ontology is a specification of
the declarative semantics involved in a business process. The theory behind REA came initially from
the field of accounting where REA was first introduced, but its components clearly have microeconomic
origins with specific ties in many instances to the use of economic definitions in the practice of building
enterprise-wide information systems. In UN/CEFACT work, all of the REA ontology definitions are applied
to the collaborative space between enterprises where market exchanges occur in closely synchronized
fashion among two or more trading partners.
In its most simple form without a high degree of precision, REA can be portrayed as a UML class diagram
with associations and generalizations relating the object classes. The intent of this annex is to display REA
simply and to explain its basic rationale. To do so, the annex will use a set of three figures (Figures B.1,
B.2, and B.3), plus two summary figures. The most advanced of the UML diagrams (Figure B.3) is a good
overall guide to the semantics of the business resource view of the UN/CEFACT Modeling Methodology.

### B.2	 The basic REA ontology

The basic REA model was first published in the July 1982 issue of The Accounting Review, the most
prominent, most reliable, and most tightly controlled outlet for theoretical-based accounting work in the
world (McCarthy 1982). Its basic premises have withstood all theoretical challenges in the 30 years since,
and its components are used extensively in a variety of educational, practical, and theoretical contexts.
The REA model work was given the first (and thus far only) Seminal Contribution to the Accounting
Information Systems Literature Award in 1996 by the American Accounting Association (AAA), and in
2003, its use as a model for teaching enterprise information systems was awarded the Innovation in
Accounting Education Award, also from the AAA. There are a number of textbooks in worldwide use that
feature REA as a pattern-oriented teaching framework.
Figure  B.1 illustrates the basic class structure of REA ontology. The left-to-right configuration of
economic Resources, economic Events, and economic Agents (renamed in UMM as “Partner”) in a typical
business collaboration pattern is the source of the model’s REA name.
A successful business collaboration involves first and foremost two types of Economic Events, each
of which details the Economic Resources involved in an exchange between two Trading Partners. For
example, a Supplier (Trading Partner) transfers ownership of an Automobile (Economic Resource) to a
Customer (Trading Partner) in return for which (duality association) the Customer will provide Money
(Economic Resource) to the Supplier. There are two mirror-image instantiations of the object pattern
shown in Figure B.1 where one transfer represents the legal or economic consideration given for the
other.
The text of this annex has been adopted from the UN/CEFACT Simple Guide to the UMM (UN/CEFACT 2003).

*[Figure B.1 — Basic REA ontology]*
The declarative semantics shown here are central to all trading relationships. Economic Resources are
objects that have value and are under the control of one of the two collaborative agents. Trading partners
always expect requited transfers of resources when they engage in commerce. Hence, Figure B.1 is a
pattern for all economic exchanges (Geerts and McCarthy 1999).

### B.3	 Adding commitments to the basic exchange ontology

In electronic commerce, the actual trading phase of an exchange is accommodated well by the object
structure shown above in Figure B.1. However, trading partners in long-term relationships need more
trusted and predictable structures where both parties contract for their exchange behavior in advance.
The REA ontology accommodates this expansion with the addition of the classes shown as Economic
Commitments, Economic Contract, and Agreement in Figure B.2.
*[Figure B.2 — REA ontology with commitments]*
A Commitment is a promise by a Trading Partner to initiate an Economic Event in the future. Performing
the Economic Events fulfills that Commitment. Commitments should always be reciprocated by the
other Trading Partner who commits to initiate another type of Economic Event in return. An Economic
Contract is a bundle of reciprocating commitments between Trading Partners who bind themselves to
one or more economic exchanges in the future. A Contract is a subtype of the more general object class
called Agreement, and Agreements can regulate other Agreements.
In the case of the automobile-for-money exchanges discussed in the prior section, Commitments would
involve the Customer agreeing to accept delivery of an Automobile on a certain date in return for which

he or she would be contractually obligated to making a series of Cash payments to the Supplier for that
purchase.
In the bottom part of Figure B.2, two additional objects of the REA ontology are illustrated: Claims and
Locations.
- Materialization of Claims is sometimes needed when Trading Partners insist on documentation of
partially completed exchanges (for example, when a Customer takes possession of an Automobile
before paying for it in full). If needed, Claims can be instantiated by documents like invoices or
by accounting artifacts like accounts-receivable. Their inclusion here is more a matter of business
custom than ontological completeness.
- A Location is another object that is sometimes needed to fill out the specification for a full economic
transfer. Locations simply identify the place where Economic Events take place.
The economic and ontological foundations of commitments are explained more completely by Geerts
and McCarthy (2005).

### B.4	 Adding types to the basic REA exchange ontology

The object pattern portrayed in Figure B.2 above is primarily descriptive in the sense that it illustrates
what actually occurred in an economic exchange or what has been committed to. In the UMM, these
descriptive components have been augmented by prescriptive components that allow the specification
of control policies or collaboration patterns. These prescriptive components are enabled by the inclusion
of type images of the basic descriptive objects (Geerts and McCarthy 2006). The class diagram of
Figure B.3 shows these additions.
The addition of types to Figure B.3 proceeds in two stages:
- The three base descriptive classes – Economic Resource, Economic Event, and Partner (Economic
Agent) – have classes added for their types. These new classes are connected to the descriptive
objects by typifies associations. An example of a Resource Type could be different models of
automobiles. An example of Economic Event Type could be the classes of retail transaction and
wholesale transactions, each with different pricing structures. An example of Partner Type could
be different classes of employees, each type with separate training requirements. Additionally, the
class Location is also typified. An example of Location Type might be different types of loading
docks with different sizes and stress capability levels.
- The full design of the Economic Commitment would necessitate associations between the
commitment and each of the new type-level objects. These are illustrated in the figure with specifies
associations.

*[Figure B.3 — REA ontology with types]*
In addition to these two groups of additions, there are other REA associations in the UMM that are not
illustrated here in an effort to minimize diagram complexity. These include:
- Contract – responsible – Partner
- Economic Commitment – destination – Location
- Partner – participates – Agreement
- Partner – participates – Economic Commitment
- Economic Commitment – reserves – Economic Resource
And finally with regard to Figure B.3, the partial integration of the elements of the REA ontology with
the components of the UMM business collaboration framework is illustrated by showing the class for
Business Collaboration (with dotted lines) and some of its associations with REA classes (also illustrated
with dotted lines). Outside of its use with the UMM and the attendant specifications, the REA ontology
has a three-level architecture that is explained by Geerts and McCarthy (1999). In the UMM, this threelevel architecture is effected by the integration of REA components within the business collaboration
framework and by the connection of the Business Requirements View (BRV) to the Business Domain
View (BDV) above it and the Business Transactions View (BTV) below it.

### B.5	 The suitability of the REA ontology within the Open-edi model

The REA ontology is well known and well used throughout the field of accounting and to a lesser extent
throughout the field of enterprise computing in general. It is the best example of a business domain
ontology in existence today, and its measures well against the most commonly cited “ontology quality”
criteria as proposed by Gomez-Perez (1998). Her functional criteria and the REA explanation of their
applicability are portrayed in Figure B.4. REA and Open-edi also fit very well together, as do REA and
the Business Requirements View of the UN/CEFACT meta-model. Figure B.5 illustrates how these three
systems correspond to each other on some very important points of emphasis. Continuing harmonization
work with both the business process group and the core components group of UN/CEFACT is emphasizing
these principles of commonality.

*[Figure B.4 — Ontology criteria and the REA ontology]*

*[Figure B.5 — Correspondence of ISO, REA, and UN/CEFACT]*

## Annex C (normative)

**Business Transaction Model (BTM): Two classes of constraints Business transactions are modeled for registering, reference and re-use as scenarios and scenario components. Business semantic descriptive techniques are used to identify and specify the key components of a business transaction, i.e., as business objects. The Business Transaction Model (BTM), as stated in ISO/IEC  15944-1, 6.1.5, has three required components namely “Person”, “Process”, and “Data”. These three fundamental components of the Business Transaction Model are presented graphically in Figure C.1.18) Figure C.1 — Business Transaction Model - Fundamental elements (graphic illustration) Using UML as a Formal Description Technique yields the following UML-based representation of the Business Transaction Model and is presented as Figure C.2.19) 18) In ISO/IEC 15944-1 for these three fundamental elements, the essential BOV aspects of the business transaction model, along with associated rules, definitions and terms as well as other attributes are stated in the following subclauses: —	 6.2 “Rules governing the Person Component” (and further Annex E); —	 6.3 “Rules governing the Process Component” (and further Annex F); and, —	 6.4 “Rules governing the Data Component” (and further Annex G). 19) This UML-based representation incorporates the rules governing the interworking of these three fundamental components as specified in ISO/IEC 15944-1.**

*[Figure C.2 — UML-based representation of Figure C.1]*
The business transaction model focuses on and addresses the essential needs of commitment exchange
among autonomous parties, i.e., the ability of Persons as parties to a business transaction being able to
make commitments and to do so while maximizing the use of automated methods. This is in addition to
existing standards which pertain to various aspects of information exchange only.20)
As such, what sets Open-edi (or e-business) apart from information exchange in general are six (6)
characteristics.21) They are:
- actions based upon following clear, predefined rules;
- commitments of the parties involved;
- commitments among the parties are automated;
- parties control and maintain their states;
- parties act autonomously; and,
- multiple simultaneous transactions can be supported.
Electronic business transactions therefore require:
- a clearly understood purpose, mutually agreed upon goal(s) explicitness and unambiguity;
- pre-definable set(s) of activities and/or processes, pre-definable and structured data;
- commitments among Persons being established through electronic data interchange;
- computational integrity and related characteristics; and,
- the above being specifiable through Open-edi Description Technique(s) (OeDTs) (as the use of
a Formal Description Technique(s) in support of modeling e-business), and executable through
information technology systems for use in real world actualizations.
It is important that users of ISO/IEC 15944 familiarize themselves with ISO/IEC 15944-1, 6.3.1 titled “Business
transactions commitment exchange added to information exchange” including the rules and definitions/terms, i.e
“Person”, and “commitment”, as well as its normative text.
Each of these six (6) characteristics is described in more detail in ISO/IEC 15944-1, Clause 5 “Characteristics
of Open-edi”.

These and related requirements of electronic business transactions are specified in the form of
“constraints”.
“Constraint” is defined in 3.14.
The Business Transaction Model has two classes of constraints; namely:
- a) those which are “self-imposed” and agreed to as commitments among the parties themselves, i.e.,
“internal constraints”; and,
- b) those which are imposed on the parties to a business transaction based on the nature of the good,
service and/or rights exchanged, the nature of the commitment made among the parties (including
ability to make commitments, the location, etc.), i.e., “external constraints”.
These two basic classes of constraints on business transactions are illustrated in Figure C.3.
*[Figure C.3 — Business Transaction Model: Classes of constraints]*
ISO/IEC 15944-1, 6.1.6 provides normative text for these two classes of constraints.

## Bibliography

[1]
ISO 1087-1:2000, Terminology work — Vocabulary — Part 1: Theory and application
[2]
ISO/IEC 2382-17:1999, Information technology — Vocabulary — Part 17: Databases
[3]
ISO 8601, Data elements and interchange formats — Information interchange — Representation of
dates and times
[4]
ISO/IEC 15944-2:2006, Information technology — Business Operational View — Part 2: Registration
of scenarios and their components as business objects
[5]
ISO 19135, Geographic information — Procedures for item registration
[6]
ISO/IEC JTC 1, Procedures for the technical work of ISO/IEC JTC 1 on Information Technology
[7]
ISO/IEC Directives.  Part 1 ( 2012) Procedures for the technical work. 9 edition
[8]
Eriksson E., & Penker M.  Business modeling with UML.  John Wiley & Sons,  NY,  2000
[9]
Geerts G., & McCarthy W.E.  An accounting object infrastructure for knowledge-based
enterprise models.  IEEE Intell. Syst. Their Appl.  1999 August, (July) pp. 89–94
[10]
Geerts G., & McCarthy W.E.  Using object templates from the REA accounting model to engineer
business processes and tasks.  The Review of Business Information Systems.  2001,  5 (4) pp. 89–
[11]
Geerts G.L., & McCarthy W.E.  An ontological analysis of the economic primitives of the
Extended-REA Enterprise Information Architecture.  Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst.  2002 March,  3 (1)
pp. 1–16
[12]
Geerts G., & McCarthy W.E. (August  2005) “The ontological foundation of REA Enterprise
Information Systems”, paper presented to the Annual Meeting of the American Accounting
Association.
[13]
Geerts G., & McCarthy W.E.  Policy-level specifications in REA Enterprise Information Systems.
Journal of Information Systems.  2006,  20 (2) pp. 37–63
[14]
Gomez-Perez A. Knowledge sharing and reuse. In:  The handbook of applied expert systems,
(Liebowitz J. ed.).  CRC Press LLC,  Boca Raton, FL,  1998
[15]
Gruber T.R.  A translation approach to portable ontology specifications.  Knowl. Acquis.  1993
June,  5 (2) pp. 199–220
[17]
Ijiri Y.  Theory of accounting measurement.  American Accounting Association,  Sarasota, FL,  1975
[18]
McCarthy W.E.  An entity-relationship view of accounting models.  Account. Rev.  1979 October,
54 (4) pp. 667–686 [October]
[19]
McCarthy W.E.  The REA accounting model: A generalized framework for accounting systems in
a shared data environment.  Account. Rev.  1982 July,  57 (3) pp. 554–578
[20]
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC32/WG1 N0190.Morita, Katsuhiro. (2001-10-22). AIW15944-4, Information
technology — Business Agreement Descriptive techniques Part 4: Open-edi Ontology
[21]
Odell J.J.  Advanced object-oriented analysis & design using UML.  Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, NY,  1998
[22]
Porter M.E.  Competitive advantage.  The Free Press,  NY,  1985

[23]
Sakai H.  1981) “A method for defining information structures and transactions in conceptual
schema design”, Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Very Large Data Bases. Vol.
7:225-34
[24]
Smith J.M., & Smith D.C.P.  Database abstractions: Aggregation and generalization.  ACM Trans.
Database Syst.  1977 June,  2 (2) pp. 105–133
[25]
Sowa J.  Conceptual structures: Information Processing in Mind and Machine.  Addisson-Wesley,
Reading, MA,  1984
[26]
Sowa J.  Knowledge representation: Logical, philosophical, and computational foundations.
Brooks/Cole Publishing,  Pacific Grove, CA,  1999
[27]
Tsichritzis D.C., & Lochovsky F.H.  Data models.  Prentice-Hall,  Englewood Cliffs, NJ,  1982
[28]
UN/CEFACT.   2003). UN/CEFACT Modeling Methodology (UMM) User Guide (CEFACT/TMG/
N093) http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/umm/UMM_userguide_220606.pdf.
